


VERNON.

All furnish’d, all in arms;

All plumed like estridges that with the wind

Bate it; like eagles having lately bathed;

Glittering in golden coats, like images;

As full of spirit as the month of May

And gorgeous as the Sun at midsummer;

Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.

I saw young Harry—with his beaver on,

His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm’d—

Rise from the ground like feather’d Mercury,

And vault it with such ease into his seat,

As if an angel dropp’d down from the clouds,

To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,

And witch the world with noble horsemanship.



HOTSPUR.

No more, no more: worse than the Sun in March,

This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come;

They come like sacrifices in their trim,

And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war,

All hot and bleeding, will we offer them:

The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit

Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire

To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh,

And yet not ours.—Come, let me taste my horse,

Who is to bear me, like a thunderbolt,

Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales:

Harry and Harry shall, hot horse to horse,

Meet, and ne’er part till one drop down a corse.—

O, that Glendower were come!



VERNON.

There is more news:

I learn’d in Worcester, as I rode along,

He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.



DOUGLAS.

That’s the worst tidings that I hear of yet.



WORCESTER.

Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.



HOTSPUR.

What may the King’s whole battle reach unto?



VERNON.

To thirty thousand.



HOTSPUR.

Forty let it be:

My father and Glendower being both away,

The powers of us may serve so great a day.

Come, let us take a muster speedily:

Doomsday is near; die all, die merrily.



DOUGLAS.

Talk not of dying: I am out of fear

Of death or death’s hand for this one half-year.



[Exeunt.]





SCENE II. A public Road near Coventry.


[Enter Falstaff and Bardolph.]

FALSTAFF.

Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry; fill me a bottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through; we’ll to Sutton-Co’fil’ to-night.

BARDOLPH.

Will you give me money, captain?



FALSTAFF.

Lay out, lay out.



BARDOLPH.

This bottle makes an angel.



FALSTAFF.

An if it do, take it for thy labour; an if it make twenty,

take them all; I’ll answer the coinage. Bid my lieutenant

Peto meet me at the town’s end.



BARDOLPH.

I will, captain: farewell.



[Exit.]

FALSTAFF.

If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused gurnet. I have misused the King’s press damnably. I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press’d me none but good householders, yeomen’s sons; inquired me out contracted bachelors, such as had been ask’d twice on the banns; such a commodity of warm slaves as had as lief hear the Devil as a drum; such as fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck fowl or a hurt wild-duck. I press’d me none but such toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bodies no bigger than pins’-heads, and they have bought out their services; and now my whole charge consists of ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of companies, slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the painted cloth, where the glutton’s dogs licked his sores; and such as, indeed, were never soldiers, but discarded unjust serving-men, younger sons to younger brothers, revolted tapsters, and ostlers trade-fallen; the cankers of a calm world and a long peace; ten times more dishonourable ragged than an old faced ancient: and such have I, to fill up the rooms of them that have bought out their services, that you would think that I had a hundred and fifty tattered Prodigals lately come from swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. A mad fellow met me on the way, and told me I had unloaded all the gibbets, and press’d the dead bodies. No eye hath seen such scarecrows. I’ll not march through Coventry with them, that’s flat: nay, and the villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had gyves on; for, indeed, I had the most of them out of prison. There’s but a shirt and a half in all my company; and the half-shirt is two napkins tack’d together and thrown over the shoulders like a herald’s coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to say the truth, stolen from my host at Saint Alban’s, or the red-nose innkeeper of Daventry. But that’s all one; they’ll find linen enough on every hedge.

[Enter Prince Henry and Westmoreland.]

PRINCE.

How now, blown Jack! how now, quilt!



FALSTAFF.

What, Hal! how now, mad wag! what a devil dost thou in

Warwickshire?—My good Lord of Westmoreland, I cry you mercy:

I thought your honour had already been at Shrewsbury.



WESTMORELAND.

Faith, Sir John, ’tis more than time that I were there, and you too; but my powers are there already. The King, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must away all, to-night.

FALSTAFF.

Tut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream.



PRINCE.

I think, to steal cream, indeed; for thy theft hath already made thee butter. But tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these that come after?

FALSTAFF.

Mine, Hal, mine.



PRINCE.

I did never see such pitiful rascals.



FALSTAFF.

Tut, tut; good enough to toss; food for powder, food for powder; they’ll fill a pit as well as better: tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.

WESTMORELAND.

Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor and bare,—too beggarly.

FALSTAFF.

Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had that; and, for their bareness, I am sure they never learn’d that of me.

PRINCE.

No, I’ll be sworn; unless you call three fingers on the ribs bare. But, sirrah, make haste: Percy is already in the field.

[Exit.]

FALSTAFF.

What, is the King encamp’d?



WESTMORELAND.

He is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long.



[Exit.]

FALSTAFF.

Well,

To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast

Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.



[Exit.]





SCENE III. The Rebel Camp near Shrewsbury.


[Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Douglas, and Vernon.]

HOTSPUR.

We’ll fight with him to-night.



WORCESTER.

It may not be.



DOUGLAS.

You give him, then, advantage.



VERNON.

Not a whit.



HOTSPUR.

Why say you so? looks he not for supply?



VERNON.

So do we.



HOTSPUR.

His is certain, ours is doubtful.



WORCESTER.

Good cousin, be advised; stir not to-night.



VERNON.

Do not, my lord.



DOUGLAS.

You do not counsel well:

You speak it out of fear and cold heart.



VERNON.

Do me no slander, Douglas: by my life,—

And I dare well maintain it with my life,—

If well-respected honour bid me on,

I hold as little counsel with weak fear

As you, my lord, or any Scot that this day lives:

Let it be seen to-morrow in the battle

Which of us fears.



DOUGLAS.

Yea, or to-night.



VERNON.

Content.



HOTSPUR.

To-night, say I.



VERNON.

Come, come, it may not be. I wonder much,

Being men of such great leading as you are,

That you foresee not what impediments

Drag back our expedition: certain Horse

Of my cousin Vernon’s are not yet come up:

Your uncle Worcester’s Horse came but to-day;

And now their pride and mettle is asleep,

Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,

That not a horse is half the half himself.



HOTSPUR.

So are the horses of the enemy

In general, journey-bated and brought low:

The better part of ours are full of rest.



WORCESTER.

The number of the King exceedeth ours.

For God’s sake, cousin, stay till all come in.



[The Trumpet sounds a parley.]

[Enter Sir Walter Blunt.]

BLUNT.

I come with gracious offers from the King,

If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.



HOTSPUR.

Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt; and would to God

You were of our determination!

Some of us love you well; and even those some

Envy your great deservings and good name,

Because you are not of our quality,

But stand against us like an enemy.



BLUNT.

And God defend but still I should stand so,

So long as out of limit and true rule

You stand against anointed majesty!

But to my charge: the King hath sent to know

The nature of your griefs; and whereupon

You conjure from the breast of civil peace

Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land

Audacious cruelty. If that the King

Have any way your good deserts forgot,

Which he confesseth to be manifold,

He bids you name your griefs; and with all speed

You shall have your desires with interest,

And pardon absolute for yourself and these

Herein misled by your suggestion.



HOTSPUR.

The King is kind; and well we know the King

Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.

My father and my uncle and myself

Did give him that same royalty he wears;

And—when he was not six-and-twenty strong,

Sick in the world’s regard, wretched and low,

A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home—

My father gave him welcome to the shore:

And—when he heard him swear and vow to God,

He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,

To sue his livery and beg his peace,

With tears of innocence and terms of zeal—

My father, in kind heart and pity moved,

Swore him assistance, and performed it too.

Now, when the lords and barons of the realm

Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,

The more and less came in with cap and knee;

Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,

Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,

Laid gifts before him, proffer’d him their oaths,

Give him their heirs as pages, follow’d him

Even at the heels in golden multitudes.

He presently—as greatness knows itself—

Steps me a little higher than his vow

Made to my father, while his blood was poor,

Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurg;

And now, forsooth, takes on him to reform

Some certain edicts and some strait decrees

That lie too heavy on the commonwealth;

Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep

Over his country’s wrongs; and, by this face,

This seeming brow of justice, did he win

The hearts of all that he did angle for:

Proceeded further; cut me off the heads

Of all the favourites, that the absent King

In deputation left behind him here

When he was personal in the Irish war.



BLUNT.

Tut, I came not to hear this.



HOTSPUR.

Then to the point:

In short time after, he deposed the King;

Soon after that, deprived him of his life;

And, in the neck of that, task’d the whole State:

To make that worse, suffer’d his kinsman March

(Who is, if every owner were well placed,

Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales,

There without ransom to lie forfeited;

Disgraced me in my happy victories,

Sought to entrap me by intelligence;

Rated my uncle from the Council-board;

In rage dismiss’d my father from the Court;

Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong;

And, in conclusion, drove us to seek out

This head of safety; and withal to pry

Into his title, the which now we find

Too indirect for long continuance.





BLUNT.

Shall I return this answer to the King?



HOTSPUR.

Not so, Sir Walter: we’ll withdraw awhile.

Go to the King; and let there be impawn’d

Some surety for a safe return again,

And in the morning early shall my uncle

Bring him our purposes: and so, farewell.



BLUNT.

I would you would accept of grace and love.



HOTSPUR.

And may be so we shall.



BLUNT.

Pray God you do.



[Exeunt.]





SCENE IV. York. A Room in the Archbishop’s Palace.


[Enter the Archbishop of York and Sir Michael.]

ARCHBISHOP.

Hie, good Sir Michael; bear this sealed brief

With winged haste to the Lord Marshal;

This to my cousin Scroop; and all the rest

To whom they are directed. If you knew

How much they do import, you would make haste.



SIR MICHAEL.

My good lord,

I guess their tenour.



ARCHBISHOP.

Like enough you do.

To-morrow, good Sir Michael, is a day

Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men

Must bide the touch; for, sir, at Shrewsbury,

As I am truly given to understand,

The King, with mighty and quick-raised power,

Meets with Lord Harry: and, I fear, Sir Michael,

What with the sickness of Northumberland,

Whose power was in the first proportion,

And what with Owen Glendower’s absence thence,

Who with them was a rated sinew too,

And comes not in, o’er-rul’d by prophecies,—

I fear the power of Percy is too weak

To wage an instant trial with the King.



SIR MICHAEL.

Why, my good lord, you need not fear;

There’s Douglas and Lord Mortimer.



ARCHBISHOP.

No, Mortimer’s not there.



SIR MICHAEL.

But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,

And there’s my Lord of Worcester; and a head

Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.



ARCHBISHOP.

And so there is: but yet the King hath drawn

The special head of all the land together;

The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,

The noble Westmoreland, and warlike Blunt;

And many more corrivals and dear men

Of estimation and command in arms.



SIR MICHAEL.

Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.



ARCHBISHOP.

I hope no less, yet needful ’tis to fear;

And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed:

For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King

Dismiss his power, he means to visit us,

For he hath heard of our confederacy;

And ’tis but wisdom to make strong against him:

Therefore make haste. I must go write again

To other friends; and so, farewell, Sir Michael.



[Exeunt.]





ACT V


SCENE I. The King’s Camp near Shrewsbury.


[Enter King Henry, Prince Henry, Lancaster, Sir Walter Blunt, and Sir John Falstaff.]

KING.

How bloodily the Sun begins to peer

Above yon busky hill! the day looks pale

At his distemperature.



PRINCE.

The southern wind

Doth play the trumpet to his purposes;

And by his hollow whistling in the leaves

Foretells a tempest and a blustering day.



KING.

Then with the losers let it sympathize,

For nothing can seem foul to those that win.—



[The trumpet sounds. Enter Worcester and Vernon.]

How, now, my Lord of Worcester! ’tis not well

That you and I should meet upon such terms

As now we meet. You have deceived our trust;

And made us doff our easy robes of peace,

To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel:

This is not well, my lord, this is not well.

What say you to’t? will you again unknit

This churlish knot of all-abhorred war,

And move in that obedient orb again

Where you did give a fair and natural light;

And be no more an exhaled meteor,

A prodigy of fear, and a portent

Of broached mischief to the unborn times?



WORCESTER.

Hear me, my liege:

For mine own part, I could be well content

To entertain the lag-end of my life

With quiet hours; for I do protest,

I have not sought the day of this dislike.



KING.

You have not sought it! why, how comes it, then?



FALSTAFF.

Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.



PRINCE.

Peace, chewet, peace!



WORCESTER.

It pleased your Majesty to turn your looks

Of favour from myself and all our House;

And yet I must remember you, my lord,

We were the first and dearest of your friends.

For you my staff of office did I break

In Richard’s time; and posted day and night

To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,

When yet you were in place and in account

Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.

It was myself, my brother, and his son,

That brought you home, and boldly did outdare

The dangers of the time. You swore to us,—

And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,—

That you did nothing purpose ’gainst the state;

Nor claim no further than your new-fall’n right,

The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster:

To this we swore our aid. But in short space

It rain’d down fortune showering on your head;

And such a flood of greatness fell on you,—

What with our help, what with the absent King,

What with the injuries of a wanton time,

The seeming sufferances that you had borne,

And the contrarious winds that held the King

So long in his unlucky Irish wars

That all in England did repute him dead,—

And, from this swarm of fair advantages,

You took occasion to be quickly woo’d

To gripe the general sway into your hand;

Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster;

And, being fed by us, you used us so

As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo-bird,

Useth the sparrow; did oppress our nest;

Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk,

That even our love thirst not come near your sight

For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing

We were enforced, for safety-sake, to fly

Out of your sight, and raise this present head:

Whereby we stand opposed by such means

As you yourself have forged against yourself,

By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,

And violation of all faith and troth

Sworn to tis in your younger enterprise.



KING.

These things, indeed, you have articulate,

Proclaim’d at market-crosses, read in churches,

To face the garment of rebellion

With some fine colour that may please the eye

Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,

Which gape and rub the elbow at the news

Of hurlyburly innovation:

And never yet did insurrection want

Such water-colours to impaint his cause;

Nor moody beggars, starving for a time

Of pellmell havoc and confusion.



PRINCE.

In both our armies there is many a soul

Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,

If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew,

The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world

In praise of Henry Percy: by my hopes,

This present enterprise set off his head,

I do not think a braver gentleman,

More active-valiant or more valiant-young,

More daring or more bold, is now alive

To grace this latter age with noble deeds.

For my part,—I may speak it to my shame,—

I have a truant been to chivalry;

And so I hear he doth account me too:

Yet this before my father’s Majesty,—

I am content that he shall take the odds

Of his great name and estimation,

And will, to save the blood on either side,

Try fortune with him in a single fight.



KING.

And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,

Albeit considerations infinite

Do make against it.—No, good Worcester, no;

We love our people well; even those we love

That are misled upon your cousin’s part;

And, will they take the offer of our grace,

Both he, and they, and you, yea, every man

Shall be my friend again, and I’ll be his:

So tell your cousin, and then bring me word

What he will do: but, if he will not yield,

Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,

And they shall do their office. So, be gone;

We will not now be troubled with reply:

We offer fair; take it advisedly.



[Exit Worcester with Vernon.]

PRINCE.

It will not be accepted, on my life:

The Douglas and the Hotspur both together

Are confident against the world in arms.



KING.

Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge;

For, on their answer, will we set on them:

And God befriend us, as our cause is just!



[Exeunt the King, Blunt, and Prince John.]

FALSTAFF.

Hal, if thou see me down in the battle, and bestride me, so; ’tis a point of friendship.

PRINCE.

Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.

Say thy prayers, and farewell.



FALSTAFF.

I would it were bedtime, Hal, and all well.



PRINCE.

Why, thou owest God a death.



[Exit.]

FALSTAFF.

’Tis not due yet; I would be loth to pay Him before His day. What need I be so forward with him that calls not on me? Well, ’tis no matter; honour pricks me on. Yea, but how if honour prick me off when I come on? how then? Can honor set-to a leg? no: or an arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no. Honour hath no skill in surgery then? no. What is honour? a word. What is that word, honour? air. A trim reckoning!—Who hath it? he that died o’ Wednesday. Doth he feel it? no. Doth be hear it? no. Is it insensible, then? yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the living? no. Why? detraction will not suffer it. Therefore I’ll none of it: honour is a mere scutcheon:—and so ends my catechism.

[Exit.]





SCENE II. The Rebel Camp.


[Enter Worcester and Vernon.]

WORCESTER.

O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,

The liberal-kind offer of the King.



VERNON.

’Twere best he did.



WORCESTER.

Then are we all undone.

It is not possible, it cannot be,

The King should keep his word in loving us;

He will suspect us still, and find a time

To punish this offence in other faults:

Suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes;

For treason is but trusted like the fox,

Who, ne’er so tame, so cherish’d, and lock’d up,

Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.

Look how we can, or sad or merrily,

Interpretation will misquote our looks;

And we shall feed like oxen at a stall,

The better cherish’d, still the nearer death.

My nephew’s trespass may be well forgot:

It hath th’ excuse of youth and heat of blood,

And an adopted name of privilege,—

A hare-brain’d Hotspur, govern’d by a spleen:

All his offences live upon my head

And on his father’s: we did train him on;

And, his corruption being ta’en from us,

We, as the spring of all, shall pay for all.

Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,

In any case, the offer of the King.



VERNON.

Deliver what you will, I’ll say ’tis so.

Here comes your cousin.



[Enter Hotspur and Douglas; Officers and Soldiers behind.]

HOTSPUR.

My uncle is return’d: deliver up

My Lord of Westmoreland.—Uncle, what news?



WORCESTER.

The King will bid you battle presently.



DOUGLAS.

Defy him by the Lord Of Westmoreland.



HOTSPUR.

Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.



DOUGLAS.

Marry, I shall, and very willingly.



[Exit.]

WORCESTER.

There is no seeming mercy in the King.



HOTSPUR.

Did you beg any? God forbid!



WORCESTER.

I told him gently of our grievances,

Of his oath-breaking; which he mended thus,

By new-forswearing that he is forsworn:

He calls us rebels, traitors; and will scourge

With haughty arms this hateful name in us.



[Re-enter Douglas.]

DOUGLAS.

Arm, gentlemen; to arms! for I have thrown

A brave defiance in King Henry’s teeth,

And Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it;

Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.



WORCESTER.

The Prince of Wales stepp’d forth before the King,

And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.



HOTSPUR.

O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads;

And that no man might draw short breath to-day

But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,

How show’d his tasking? seem’d it in contempt?



VERNON.

No, by my soul: I never in my life

Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,

Unless a brother should a brother dare

To gentle exercise and proof of arms.

He gave you all the duties of a man;

Trimm’d up your praises with a princely tongue;

Spoke your deservings like a chronicle;

Making you ever better than his praise,

By still dispraising praise valued with you;

And, which became him like a prince indeed,

He made a blushing cital of himself;

And chid his truant youth with such a grace,

As if he master’d there a double spirit,

Of teaching and of learning instantly.

There did he pause: but let me tell the world,

If he outlive the envy of this day,

England did never owe so sweet a hope,

So much misconstrued in his wantonness.



HOTSPUR.

Cousin, I think thou art enamoured

Upon his follies: never did I hear

Of any prince so wild o’ liberty.

But be he as he will, yet once ere night

I will embrace him with a soldier’s arm,

That he shall shrink under my courtesy.—

Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends,

Better consider what you have to do

Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue,

Can lift your blood up with persuasion.



[Enter a Messenger.]

MESSENGER.

My lord, here are letters for you.



HOTSPUR.

I cannot read them now.—

O gentlemen, the time of life is short!

To spend that shortness basely were too long,

If life did ride upon a dial’s point,

Still ending at th’ arrival of an hour.

An if we live, we live to tread on kings;

If die, brave death, when princes die with us!

Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair,

When the intent of bearing them is just.



[Enter another Messenger.]

MESSENGER.

My lord, prepare: the King comes on apace.



HOTSPUR.

I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale,

For I profess not talking; only this,

Let each man do his best: and here draw I

A sword, whose temper I intend to stain

With the best blood that I can meet withal

In the adventure of this perilous day.

Now, Esperance! Percy! and set on.

Sound all the lofty instruments of war,

And by that music let us all embrace;

For, Heaven to Earth, some of us never shall

A second time do such a courtesy.



[The trumpets sound. They embrace, and exeunt.]





SCENE III. Plain between the Camps.


[Excursions, and Parties fighting. Alarum to the battle.

Then enter Douglas and Sir Walter Blunt, meeting.]



BLUNT.

What is thy name, that in the battle thus

Thou crossest me? what honour dost thou seek

Upon my head?



DOUGLAS.

Know, then, my name is Douglas,

And I do haunt thee in the battle thus

Because some tell me that thou art a king.



BLUNT.

They tell thee true.



DOUGLAS.

The Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath bought

Thy likeness; for, instead of thee, King Harry,

This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee,

Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.



BLUNT.

I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot;

And thou shalt find a king that will revenge

Lord Stafford’s death.



[They fight, and Blunt is slain. Enter Hotspur.]

HOTSPUR.

O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,

I never had triumphed o’er a Scot.



DOUGLAS.

All’s done, all’s won; here breathless lies the King.



HOTSPUR.

Where?



DOUGLAS.

Here.



HOTSPUR.

This, Douglas? no; I know this face full well:

A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt;

Semblably furnish’d like the King himself.



DOUGLAS.

A fool go with thy soul, where’re it goes!

A borrow’d title hast thou bought too dear:

Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?



HOTSPUR.

The King hath many marching in his coats.



DOUGLAS.

Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats;

I’ll murder all his wardrobe piece by piece,

Until I meet the King.



HOTSPUR.

Up, and away!

Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.



[Exeunt.]

[Alarums. Enter Falstaff.]

FALSTAFF.

Though I could ’scape shot-free at London, I fear the shot here; here’s no scoring but upon the pate.—Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there’s honour for you! here’s no vanity! I am as hot as molten lead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me! I need no more weight than mine own bowels. I have led my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there’s not three of my hundred and fifty left alive; and they are for the town’s end, to beg during life. But who comes here?

[Enter Prince Henry.]

PRINCE.

What, stand’st thou idle here? lend me thy sword:

Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff

Under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,

Whose deaths are yet unrevenged: I pr’ythee,

Lend me thy sword.



FALSTAFF.

O Hal, I pr’ythee give me leave to breathe awhile. Turk

Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I have done this

day. I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.



PRINCE.

He is indeed; and living to kill thee.

I pr’ythee, lend me thy sword.



FALSTAFF.

Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou gett’st not my sword; but take my pistol, if thou wilt.

PRINCE.

Give it me: what, is it in the case?



FALSTAFF.

Ay, Hal. ’Tis hot, ’tis hot: there’s that will sack a city.



[The Prince draws out a bottle of sack.]

What, is’t a time to jest and dally now?

[Throws it at him, and exit.]

FALSTAFF.

Well, if Percy be alive, I’ll pierce him. If he do come in my way, so; if he do not, if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me. I like not such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: give me life; which if I can save, so; if not, honour comes unlooked for, and there’s an end.

[Exit.]





SCENE IV. Another Part of the Field.


[Alarums. Excursions. Enter King Henry, Prince Henry,

Lancaster, and Westmoreland.]



KING.

I pr’ythee,

Harry, withdraw thyself; thou bleedest too much.—

Lord John of Lancaster, go you unto him.



LANCASTER.

Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.



PRINCE.

I do beseech your Majesty, make up,

Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.



KING.

I will do so.—

My Lord of Westmoreland, lead him to his tent.



WESTMORELAND.

Come, my lord, I’ll lead you to your tent.



PRINCE.

Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help:

And God forbid, a shallow scratch should drive

The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,

Where stain’d nobility lies trodden on,

And rebels’ arms triumph in massacres!



LANCASTER.

We breathe too long:—come, cousin Westmoreland,

Our duty this way lies; for God’s sake, come.



[Exeunt Lancaster and Westmoreland.]

PRINCE.

By Heaven, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster;

I did not think thee lord of such a spirit:

Before, I loved thee as a brother, John;

But now I do respect thee as my soul.



KING.

I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point

With lustier maintenance than I did look for

Of such an ungrown warrior.



PRINCE.

O, this boy

Lends mettle to us all!



[Exit.]

[Alarums. Enter Douglas.]

DOUGLAS.

Another king! they grow like Hydra’s heads:

I am the Douglas, fatal to all those



That wear those colours on them.—What art thou,

That counterfeit’st the person of a king?



KING.

The King himself; who, Douglas, grieves at heart

So many of his shadows thou hast met,

And not the very King. I have two boys

Seek Percy and thyself about the field:

But, seeing thou fall’st on me so luckily,

I will assay thee; so, defend thyself.



DOUGLAS.

I fear thou art another counterfeit;

And yet, in faith, thou bear’st thee like a king:

But mine I’m sure thou art, whoe’er thou be,

And thus I win thee.



[They fight; the King being in danger, re-enter Prince Henry.]

PRINCE.

Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like

Never to hold it up again! the spirits

Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt are in my arms:

It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee;

Who never promiseth but he means to pay.—



[They fight: Douglas flies.]

Cheerly, my lord: how fares your Grace?

Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succour sent,

And so hath Clifton: I’ll to Clifton straight.



KING.

Stay, and breathe awhile:

Thou hast redeem’d thy lost opinion;

And show’d thou makest some tender of my life,

In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.



PRINCE.

O God, they did me too much injury

That ever said I hearken’d for your death!

If it were so, I might have let alone

Th’ insulting hand of Douglas over you,

Which would have been as speedy in your end

As all the poisonous potions in the world,

And saved the treacherous labour of your son.



KING.

Make up to Clifton: I’ll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.



[Exit.]

[Enter Hotspur.]

HOTSPUR.

If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.



PRINCE.

Thou speak’st as if I would deny my name.



HOTSPUR.

My name is Harry Percy.



PRINCE.

Why, then I see

A very valiant rebel of the name.

I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,

To share with me in glory any more:

Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere;

Nor can one England brook a double reign,

Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.



HOTSPUR.

Nor shall it, Harry; for the hour is come

To end the one of us; and would to God

Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!



PRINCE.

I’ll make it greater ere I part from thee;

And all the budding honours on thy crest

I’ll crop, to make a garland for my head.



HOTSPUR.

I can no longer brook thy vanities.



[They fight.]

[Enter Falstaff.]

FALSTAFF.

Well said, Hal! to it, Hal! Nay, you shall find no boy’s play here, I can tell you.

[Re-enter Douglas; he fights with Falstaff, who falls down as if he were dead, and exit Douglas. Hotspure is wounded, and falls.]

HOTSPUR.

O Harry, thou hast robb’d me of my youth!

I better brook the loss of brittle life

Than those proud titles thou hast won of me;

They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh:

But thoughts the slave of life, and life Time’s fool,

And Time, that takes survey of all the world,

Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,

But that the earthy and cold hand of death

Lies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dust,

And food for—



[Dies.]

PRINCE.

For worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart!

Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!

When that this body did contain a spirit,

A kingdom for it was too small a bound;

But now two paces of the vilest earth

Is room enough. This earth that bears thee dead

Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.

If thou wert sensible of courtesy,

I should not make so dear a show of zeal:

But let my favours hide thy mangled face;

And, even in thy behalf, I’ll thank myself

For doing these fair rites of tenderness.

Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to Heaven!

Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,

But not remember’d in thy epitaph!—



[Sees Falstaff on the ground.]

What, old acquaintance? could not all this flesh

Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!

I could have better spared a better man:

O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,

If I were much in love with vanity!

Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,

Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.

Embowell’d will I see thee by-and-by:

Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.



[Exit.]

FALSTAFF.

[Rising.] Embowell’d! if thou embowel me to-day, I’ll give you leave to powder me and eat me too to-morrow. ’Sblood, ’twas time to counterfeit, or that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit! I lie; I am no counterfeit: to die, is to be a counterfeit; for he is but the counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man: but to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life indeed. The better part of valour is discretion; in the which better part I have saved my life.— Zwounds, I am afraid of this gunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if he should counterfeit too, and rise? by my faith, I am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit. Therefore I’ll make him sure; yea, and I’ll swear I kill’d him. Why may not he rise as well as I? Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me. Therefore, sirrah, with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.

[Takes Hotspur on his hack.]

[Re-enter Prince Henry and Lancaster.]

PRINCE.

Come, brother John; full bravely hast thou flesh’d

Thy maiden sword.



LANCASTER.

But, soft! whom have we here?

Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?



PRINCE.

I did; I saw him dead, breathless and bleeding

Upon the ground.—

Art thou alive? or is it fantasy

That plays upon our eyesight? I pr’ythee, speak;

We will not trust our eyes without our ears.

Thou art not what thou seem’st.



FALSTAFF.

No, that’s certain; I am not a double man: but if I be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy! [Throwing the body down.] if your father will do me any honour, so; if not, let him kill the next Percy himself. I look to be either earl or duke, I can assure you.

PRINCE.

Why, Percy I kill’d myself, and saw thee dead.



FALSTAFF.

Didst thou?— Lord, Lord, how this world is given to lying!— I grant you I was down and out of breath; and so was he: but we rose both at an instant, and fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be believed, so; if not, let them that should reward valour bear the sin upon their own heads. I’ll take it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the thigh: if the man were alive, and would deny it, zwounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.

LANCASTER.

This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.



PRINCE.

This is the strangest fellow, brother John.—

Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back:

For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,

I’ll gild it with the happiest terms I have.—



[A retreat is sounded.]

The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.

Come, brother, let’s to th’ highest of the field,

To see what friends are living, who are dead.



[Exeunt Prince Henry and Lancaster.]

FALSTAFF.

I’ll follow, as they say, for reward. He that rewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great, I’ll grow less; for I’ll purge, and leave sack, and live cleanly as a nobleman should do.

[Exit, bearing off the body.]





SCENE V. Another Part of the Field.


[The trumpets sound. Enter King Henry, Prince Henry,

Lancaster, Westmoreland, and others, with Worcester and

Vernon prisoners.]



KING.

Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.—

Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace,

Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?

And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?

Misuse the tenour of thy kinsman’s trust?

Three knights upon our party slain to-day,

A noble earl, and many a creature else,

Had been alive this hour,

If, like a Christian, thou hadst truly borne

Betwixt our armies true intelligence.



WORCESTER.

What I have done my safety urged me to;

And I embrace this fortune patiently,

Since not to be avoided it fails on me.



KING.

Bear Worcester to the death, and Vernon too:

Other offenders we will pause upon.—



[Exeunt Worcester and Vernon, guarded.]

How goes the field?

PRINCE.

The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw

The fortune of the day quite turn’d from him,

The noble Percy slain, and all his men

Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;

And, falling from a hill, he was so bruised

That the pursuers took him. At my tent

The Douglas is: and I beseech your Grace

I may dispose of him.



KING.

With all my heart.



PRINCE.

Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you

This honourable bounty shall belong:

Go to the Douglas, and deliver him

Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free:

His valour, shown upon our crests to-day,

Hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds

Even in the bosom of our adversaries.



KING.

Then this remains, that we divide our power.—

You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland,

Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,

To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,

Who, as we hear, are busily in arms:

Myself,—and you, son Harry,—will towards Wales,

To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.

Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,

Meeting the check of such another day;

And since this business so fair is done,

Let us not leave till all our own be won.



[Exeunt.]





THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH


Dramatis Personae

RUMOUR, the Presenter

KING HENRY THE FOURTH



HENRY, PRINCE OF WALES, afterwards HENRY

PRINCE JOHN OF LANCASTER

PRINCE HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER

THOMAS, DUKE OF CLARENCE

Sons of Henry IV



EARL OF NORTHUMBERLAND

SCROOP, ARCHBISHOP OF YORK

LORD MOWBRAY

LORD HASTINGS

LORD BARDOLPH

SIR JOHN COLVILLE

TRAVERS and MORTON, retainers of Northumberland

Opposites against King Henry IV



EARL OF WARWICK

EARL OF WESTMORELAND

EARL OF SURREY

EARL OF KENT

GOWER

HARCOURT

BLUNT

Of the King's party



LORD CHIEF JUSTICE

SERVANT, to Lord Chief Justice



SIR JOHN FALSTAFF

EDWARD POINS

BARDOLPH

PISTOL

PETO

Irregular humourists



PAGE, to Falstaff

ROBERT SHALLOW and SILENCE, country Justices

DAVY, servant to Shallow



FANG and SNARE, Sheriff's officers

RALPH MOULDY

SIMON SHADOW

THOMAS WART

FRANCIS FEEBLE

PETER BULLCALF

Country soldiers



FRANCIS, a drawer

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND

LADY PERCY, Percy's widow

HOSTESS QUICKLY, of the Boar's Head, Eastcheap

DOLL TEARSHEET



LORDS, Attendants, Porter, Drawers, Beadles, Grooms, Servants,

Speaker of the Epilogue





SCENE: England


INDUCTION

INDUCTION.

Warkworth. Before NORTHUMBERLAND'S Castle



Enter RUMOUR, painted full of tongues

RUMOUR. Open your ears; for which of you will stop

The vent of hearing when loud Rumour speaks?

I, from the orient to the drooping west,

Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold

The acts commenced on this ball of earth.

Upon my tongues continual slanders ride,

The which in every language I pronounce,

Stuffing the ears of men with false reports.

I speak of peace while covert emnity,

Under the smile of safety, wounds the world;

And who but Rumour, who but only I,

Make fearful musters and prepar'd defence,

Whiles the big year, swoln with some other grief,

Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war,

And no such matter? Rumour is a pipe

Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures,

And of so easy and so plain a stop

That the blunt monster with uncounted heads,

The still-discordant wav'ring multitude,

Can play upon it. But what need I thus

My well-known body to anatomize

Among my household? Why is Rumour here?

I run before King Harry's victory,

Who, in a bloody field by Shrewsbury,

Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops,

Quenching the flame of bold rebellion

Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I

To speak so true at first? My office is

To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell

Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword,

And that the King before the Douglas' rage

Stoop'd his anointed head as low as death.

This have I rumour'd through the peasant towns

Between that royal field of Shrewsbury

And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone,

Where Hotspur's father, old Northumberland,

Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on,

And not a man of them brings other news

Than they have learnt of me. From Rumour's tongues

They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true wrongs.

Exit





ACT I. SCENE I. Warkworth. Before NORTHUMBERLAND'S Castle


Enter LORD BARDOLPH

LORD BARDOLPH. Who keeps the gate here, ho?

The PORTER opens the gate

Where is the Earl?

PORTER. What shall I say you are?

LORD BARDOLPH. Tell thou the Earl

That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.

PORTER. His lordship is walk'd forth into the orchard.

Please it your honour knock but at the gate,

And he himself will answer.



Enter NORTHUMBERLAND

LORD BARDOLPH. Here comes the Earl. Exit PORTER

NORTHUMBERLAND. What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now

Should be the father of some stratagem.

The times are wild; contention, like a horse

Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose

And bears down all before him.

LORD BARDOLPH. Noble Earl,

I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Good, an God will!

LORD BARDOLPH. As good as heart can wish.

The King is almost wounded to the death;

And, in the fortune of my lord your son,

Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts

Kill'd by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John,

And Westmoreland, and Stafford, fled the field;

And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John,

Is prisoner to your son. O, such a day,

So fought, so followed, and so fairly won,

Came not till now to dignify the times,

Since Cxsar's fortunes!

NORTHUMBERLAND. How is this deriv'd?

Saw you the field? Came you from Shrewsbury?

LORD BARDOLPH. I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence;

A gentleman well bred and of good name,

That freely rend'red me these news for true.



Enter TRAVERS

NORTHUMBERLAND. Here comes my servant Travers, whom I sent

On Tuesday last to listen after news.

LORD BARDOLPH. My lord, I over-rode him on the way;

And he is furnish'd with no certainties

More than he haply may retail from me.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?

TRAVERS. My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turn'd me back

With joyful tidings; and, being better hors'd,

Out-rode me. After him came spurring hard

A gentleman, almost forspent with speed,

That stopp'd by me to breathe his bloodied horse.

He ask'd the way to Chester; and of him

I did demand what news from Shrewsbury.

He told me that rebellion had bad luck,

And that young Harry Percy's spur was cold.

With that he gave his able horse the head

And, bending forward, struck his armed heels

Against the panting sides of his poor jade

Up to the rowel-head; and starting so,

He seem'd in running to devour the way,

Staying no longer question.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Ha! Again:

Said he young Harry Percy's spur was cold?

Of Hotspur, Coldspur? that rebellion

Had met ill luck?

LORD BARDOLPH. My lord, I'll tell you what:

If my young lord your son have not the day,

Upon mine honour, for a silken point

I'll give my barony. Never talk of it.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers

Give then such instances of loss?

LORD BARDOLPH. Who- he?

He was some hilding fellow that had stol'n

The horse he rode on and, upon my life,

Spoke at a venture. Look, here comes more news.



Enter Morton

NORTHUMBERLAND. Yea, this man's brow, like to a title-leaf,

Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.

So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood

Hath left a witness'd usurpation.

Say, Morton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury?

MORTON. I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord;

Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask

To fright our party.

NORTHUMBERLAND. How doth my son and brother?

Thou tremblest; and the whiteness in thy cheek

Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand.

Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless,

So dull, so dread in look, so woe-begone,

Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night

And would have told him half his Troy was burnt;

But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,

And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it.

This thou wouldst say: 'Your son did thus and thus;

Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas'-

Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds;

But in the end, to stop my ear indeed,

Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise,

Ending with 'Brother, son, and all, are dead.'

MORTON. Douglas is living, and your brother, yet;

But for my lord your son-

NORTHUMBERLAND. Why, he is dead.

See what a ready tongue suspicion hath!

He that but fears the thing he would not know

Hath by instinct knowledge from others' eyes

That what he fear'd is chanced. Yet speak, Morton;

Tell thou an earl his divination lies,

And I will take it as a sweet disgrace

And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.

MORTON. You are too great to be by me gainsaid;

Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Yet, for all this, say not that Percy's dead.

I see a strange confession in thine eye;

Thou shak'st thy head, and hold'st it fear or sin

To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so:

The tongue offends not that reports his death;

And he doth sin that doth belie the dead,

Not he which says the dead is not alive.

Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news

Hath but a losing office, and his tongue

Sounds ever after as a sullen bell,

Rememb'red tolling a departing friend.

LORD BARDOLPH. I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.

MORTON. I am sorry I should force you to believe

That which I would to God I had not seen;

But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state,

Rend'ring faint quittance, wearied and out-breath'd,

To Harry Monmouth, whose swift wrath beat down

The never-daunted Percy to the earth,

From whence with life he never more sprung up.

In few, his death- whose spirit lent a fire

Even to the dullest peasant in his camp-

Being bruited once, took fire and heat away

From the best-temper'd courage in his troops;

For from his metal was his party steeled;

Which once in him abated, an the rest

Turn'd on themselves, like dull and heavy lead.

And as the thing that's heavy in itself

Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,

So did our men, heavy in Hotspur's loss,

Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear

That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim

Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety,

Fly from the field. Then was that noble Worcester

Too soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot,

The bloody Douglas, whose well-labouring sword

Had three times slain th' appearance of the King,

Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame

Of those that turn'd their backs, and in his flight,

Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all

Is that the King hath won, and hath sent out

A speedy power to encounter you, my lord,

Under the conduct of young Lancaster

And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.

NORTHUMBERLAND. For this I shall have time enough to mourn.

In poison there is physic; and these news,

Having been well, that would have made me sick,

Being sick, have in some measure made me well;

And as the wretch whose fever-weak'ned joints,

Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life,

Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire

Out of his keeper's arms, even so my limbs,

Weak'ned with grief, being now enrag'd with grief,

Are thrice themselves. Hence, therefore, thou nice crutch!

A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel

Must glove this hand; and hence, thou sickly coif!

Thou art a guard too wanton for the head

Which princes, flesh'd with conquest, aim to hit.

Now bind my brows with iron; and approach

The ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring

To frown upon th' enrag'd Northumberland!

Let heaven kiss earth! Now let not Nature's hand

Keep the wild flood confin'd! Let order die!

And let this world no longer be a stage

To feed contention in a ling'ring act;

But let one spirit of the first-born Cain

Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set

On bloody courses, the rude scene may end

And darkness be the burier of the dead!

LORD BARDOLPH. This strained passion doth you wrong, my lord.

MORTON. Sweet Earl, divorce not wisdom from your honour.

The lives of all your loving complices

Lean on your health; the which, if you give o'er

To stormy passion, must perforce decay.

You cast th' event of war, my noble lord,

And summ'd the account of chance before you said

'Let us make head.' It was your pre-surmise

That in the dole of blows your son might drop.

You knew he walk'd o'er perils on an edge,

More likely to fall in than to get o'er;

You were advis'd his flesh was capable

Of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit

Would lift him where most trade of danger rang'd;

Yet did you say 'Go forth'; and none of this,

Though strongly apprehended, could restrain

The stiff-borne action. What hath then befall'n,

Or what hath this bold enterprise brought forth

More than that being which was like to be?

LORD BARDOLPH. We all that are engaged to this loss

Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas

That if we wrought out life 'twas ten to one;

And yet we ventur'd, for the gain propos'd

Chok'd the respect of likely peril fear'd;

And since we are o'erset, venture again.

Come, we will put forth, body and goods.

MORTON. 'Tis more than time. And, my most noble lord,

I hear for certain, and dare speak the truth:

The gentle Archbishop of York is up

With well-appointed pow'rs. He is a man

Who with a double surety binds his followers.

My lord your son had only but the corpse,

But shadows and the shows of men, to fight;

For that same word 'rebellion' did divide

The action of their bodies from their souls;

And they did fight with queasiness, constrain'd,

As men drink potions; that their weapons only

Seem'd on our side, but for their spirits and souls

This word 'rebellion'- it had froze them up,

As fish are in a pond. But now the Bishop

Turns insurrection to religion.

Suppos'd sincere and holy in his thoughts,

He's follow'd both with body and with mind;

And doth enlarge his rising with the blood

Of fair King Richard, scrap'd from Pomfret stones;

Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause;

Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land,

Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke;

And more and less do flock to follow him.

NORTHUMBERLAND. I knew of this before; but, to speak truth,

This present grief had wip'd it from my mind.

Go in with me; and counsel every man

The aptest way for safety and revenge.

Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed-

Never so few, and never yet more need. Exeunt





SCENE II. London. A street


Enter SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, with his PAGE bearing his sword and buckler

FALSTAFF. Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?

PAGE. He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water; but

for the party that owed it, he might have moe diseases than he

knew for.

FALSTAFF. Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me. The brain of

this foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent anything

that intends to laughter, more than I invent or is invented on

me. I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in

other men. I do here walk before thee like a sow that hath

overwhelm'd all her litter but one. If the Prince put thee into

my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then I

have no judgment. Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be

worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. I was never mann'd with

an agate till now; but I will inset you neither in gold nor

silver, but in vile apparel, and send you back again to your

master, for a jewel- the juvenal, the Prince your master, whose

chin is not yet fledge. I will sooner have a beard grow in the

palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek; and yet he

will not stick to say his face is a face-royal. God may finish it

when he will, 'tis not a hair amiss yet. He may keep it still at

a face-royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it;

and yet he'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his

father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace, but he's almost

out of mine, I can assure him. What said Master Dommelton about

the satin for my short cloak and my slops?

PAGE. He said, sir, you should procure him better assurance than

Bardolph. He would not take his band and yours; he liked not the

security.

FALSTAFF. Let him be damn'd, like the Glutton; pray God his tongue

be hotter! A whoreson Achitophel! A rascal-yea-forsooth knave, to

bear a gentleman in hand, and then stand upon security! The

whoreson smooth-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes, and

bunches of keys at their girdles; and if a man is through with

them in honest taking-up, then they must stand upon security. I

had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop

it with security. I look'd 'a should have sent me two and twenty

yards of satin, as I am a true knight, and he sends me security.

Well, he may sleep in security; for he hath the horn of

abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through it; and

yet cannot he see, though he have his own lanthorn to light him.

Where's Bardolph?

PAGE. He's gone into Smithfield to buy your worship horse.

FALSTAFF. I bought him in Paul's, and he'll buy me a horse in

Smithfield. An I could get me but a wife in the stews, I were

mann'd, hors'd, and wiv'd.



Enter the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE and SERVANT

PAGE. Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the Prince for striking him about Bardolph. FALSTAFF. Wait close; I will not see him. CHIEF JUSTICE. What's he that goes there? SERVANT. Falstaff, an't please your lordship. CHIEF JUSTICE. He that was in question for the robb'ry? SERVANT. He, my lord; but he hath since done good service at Shrewsbury, and, as I hear, is now going with some charge to the Lord John of Lancaster. CHIEF JUSTICE. What, to York? Call him back again. SERVANT. Sir John Falstaff! FALSTAFF. Boy, tell him I am deaf. PAGE. You must speak louder; my master is deaf. CHIEF JUSTICE. I am sure he is, to the hearing of anything good. Go, pluck him by the elbow; I must speak with him. SERVANT. Sir John! FALSTAFF. What! a young knave, and begging! Is there not wars? Is there not employment? Doth not the King lack subjects? Do not the rebels need soldiers? Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side, were it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it. SERVANT. You mistake me, sir. FALSTAFF. Why, sir, did I say you were an honest man? Setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, I had lied in my throat if I had said so. SERVANT. I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and your soldiership aside; and give me leave to tell you you in your throat, if you say I am any other than an honest man. FALSTAFF. I give thee leave to tell me so! I lay aside that which grows to me! If thou get'st any leave of me, hang me; if thou tak'st leave, thou wert better be hang'd. You hunt counter. Hence! Avaunt! SERVANT. Sir, my lord would speak with you. CHIEF JUSTICE. Sir John Falstaff, a word with you. FALSTAFF. My good lord! God give your lordship good time of day. I am glad to see your lordship abroad. I heard say your lordship was sick; I hope your lordship goes abroad by advice. Your lordship, though not clean past your youth, hath yet some smack of age in you, some relish of the saltness of time; and I most humbly beseech your lordship to have a reverend care of your health. CHIEF JUSTICE. Sir John, I sent for you before your expedition to Shrewsbury. FALSTAFF. An't please your lordship, I hear his Majesty is return'd with some discomfort from Wales. CHIEF JUSTICE. I talk not of his Majesty. You would not come when I sent for you. FALSTAFF. And I hear, moreover, his Highness is fall'n into this same whoreson apoplexy. CHIEF JUSTICE. Well God mend him! I pray you let me speak with you. FALSTAFF. This apoplexy, as I take it, is a kind of lethargy, an't please your lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a whoreson tingling. CHIEF JUSTICE. What tell you me of it? Be it as it is. FALSTAFF. It hath it original from much grief, from study, and perturbation of the brain. I have read the cause of his effects in Galen; it is a kind of deafness. CHIEF JUSTICE. I think you are fall'n into the disease, for you hear not what I say to you. FALSTAFF. Very well, my lord, very well. Rather an't please you, it is the disease of not listening, the malady of not marking, that I am troubled withal. CHIEF JUSTICE. To punish you by the heels would amend the attention of your ears; and I care not if I do become your physician. FALSTAFF. I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so patient. Your lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me in respect of poverty; but how I should be your patient to follow your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or indeed a scruple itself. CHIEF JUSTICE. I sent for you, when there were matters against you for your life, to come speak with me. FALSTAFF. As I was then advis'd by my learned counsel in the laws of this land-service, I did not come. CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in great infamy. FALSTAFF. He that buckles himself in my belt cannot live in less. CHIEF JUSTICE. Your means are very slender, and your waste is great. FALSTAFF. I would it were otherwise; I would my means were greater and my waist slenderer. CHIEF JUSTICE. You have misled the youthful Prince. FALSTAFF. The young Prince hath misled me. I am the fellow with the great belly, and he my dog. CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, I am loath to gall a new-heal'd wound. Your day's service at Shrewsbury hath a little gilded over your night's exploit on Gadshill. You may thank th' unquiet time for your quiet o'erposting that action. FALSTAFF. My lord- CHIEF JUSTICE. But since all is well, keep it so: wake not a sleeping wolf. FALSTAFF. To wake a wolf is as bad as smell a fox. CHIEF JUSTICE. What! you are as a candle, the better part burnt out. FALSTAFF. A wassail candle, my lord- all tallow; if I did say of wax, my growth would approve the truth. CHIEF JUSTICE. There is not a white hair in your face but should have his effect of gravity. FALSTAFF. His effect of gravy, gravy, CHIEF JUSTICE. You follow the young Prince up and down, like his ill angel. FALSTAFF. Not so, my lord. Your ill angel is light; but hope he that looks upon me will take me without weighing. And yet in some respects, I grant, I cannot go- I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little regard in these costermongers' times that true valour is turn'd berod; pregnancy is made a tapster, and his quick wit wasted in giving reckonings; all the other gifts appertinent to man, as the malice of this age shapes them, are not worth a gooseberry. You that are old consider not the capacities of us that are young; you do measure the heat of our livers with the bitterness of your galls; and we that are in the vaward of our youth, must confess, are wags too. CHIEF JUSTICE. Do you set down your name in the scroll of youth, that are written down old with all the characters of age? Have you not a moist eye, a dry hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard, a decreasing leg, an increasing belly? Is not your voice broken, your wind short, your chin double, your wit single, and every part about you blasted with antiquity? And will you yet call yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir John! FALSTAFF. My lord, I was born about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a white head and something a round belly. For my voice- I have lost it with hallooing and singing of anthems. To approve my youth further, I will not. The truth is, I am only old in judgment and understanding; and he that will caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him. For the box of the ear that the Prince gave you- he gave it like a rude prince, and you took it like a sensible lord. I have check'd him for it; and the young lion repents- marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but in new silk and old sack. CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, God send the Prince a better companion! FALSTAFF. God send the companion a better prince! I cannot rid my hands of him. CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, the King hath sever'd you. I hear you are going with Lord John of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of Northumberland. FALSTAFF. Yea; I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But look you pray, all you that kiss my Lady Peace at home, that our armies join not in a hot day; for, by the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, and I mean not to sweat extraordinarily. If it be a hot day, and I brandish anything but a bottle, I would I might never spit white again. There is not a dangerous action can peep out his head but I am thrust upon it. Well, I cannot last ever; but it was alway yet the trick of our English nation, if they have a good thing, to make it too common. If ye will needs say I am an old man, you should give me rest. I would to God my name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is. I were better to be eaten to death with a rust than to be scoured to nothing with perpetual motion. CHIEF JUSTICE. Well, be honest, be honest; and God bless your expedition! FALSTAFF. Will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me forth? CHIEF JUSTICE. Not a penny, not a penny; you are too impatient to bear crosses. Fare you well. Commend me to my cousin Westmoreland. Exeunt CHIEF JUSTICE and SERVANT FALSTAFF. If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A man can no more separate age and covetousness than 'a can part young limbs and lechery; but the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the other; and so both the degrees prevent my curses. Boy! PAGE. Sir? FALSTAFF. What money is in my purse? PAGE. Seven groats and two pence. FALSTAFF. I can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse; borrowing only lingers and lingers it out, but the disease is incurable. Go bear this letter to my Lord of Lancaster; this to the Prince; this to the Earl of Westmoreland; and this to old Mistress Ursula, whom I have weekly sworn to marry since I perceiv'd the first white hair of my chin. About it; you know where to find me. [Exit PAGE] A pox of this gout! or, a gout of this pox! for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great toe. 'Tis no matter if I do halt; I have the wars for my colour, and my pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit will make use of anything. I will turn diseases to commodity. Exit





SCENE III. York. The ARCHBISHOP'S palace


Enter the ARCHBISHOP, THOMAS MOWBRAY the EARL MARSHAL, LORD HASTINGS, and LORD BARDOLPH

ARCHBISHOP. Thus have you heard our cause and known our means;

And, my most noble friends, I pray you all

Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes-

And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?

MOWBRAY. I well allow the occasion of our amis;

But gladly would be better satisfied

How, in our means, we should advance ourselves

To look with forehead bold and big enough

Upon the power and puissance of the King.

HASTINGS. Our present musters grow upon the file

To five and twenty thousand men of choice;

And our supplies live largely in the hope

Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns

With an incensed fire of injuries.

LORD BARDOLPH. The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus:

Whether our present five and twenty thousand

May hold up head without Northumberland?

HASTINGS. With him, we may.

LORD BARDOLPH. Yea, marry, there's the point;

But if without him we be thought too feeble,

My judgment is we should not step too far

Till we had his assistance by the hand;

For, in a theme so bloody-fac'd as this,

Conjecture, expectation, and surmise

Of aids incertain, should not be admitted.

ARCHBISHOP. 'Tis very true, Lord Bardolph; for indeed

It was young Hotspur's case at Shrewsbury.

LORD BARDOLPH. It was, my lord; who lin'd himself with hope,

Eating the air and promise of supply,

Flatt'ring himself in project of a power

Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts;

And so, with great imagination

Proper to madmen, led his powers to death,

And, winking, leapt into destruction.

HASTINGS. But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt

To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.

LORD BARDOLPH. Yes, if this present quality of war-

Indeed the instant action, a cause on foot-

Lives so in hope, as in an early spring

We see th' appearing buds; which to prove fruit

Hope gives not so much warrant, as despair

That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build,

We first survey the plot, then draw the model;

And when we see the figure of the house,

Then we must rate the cost of the erection;

Which if we find outweighs ability,

What do we then but draw anew the model

In fewer offices, or at least desist

To build at all? Much more, in this great work-

Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down

And set another up- should we survey

The plot of situation and the model,

Consent upon a sure foundation,

Question surveyors, know our own estate

How able such a work to undergo-

To weigh against his opposite; or else

We fortify in paper and in figures,

Using the names of men instead of men;

Like one that draws the model of a house

Beyond his power to build it; who, half through,

Gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost

A naked subject to the weeping clouds

And waste for churlish winter's tyranny.

HASTINGS. Grant that our hopes- yet likely of fair birth-

Should be still-born, and that we now possess'd

The utmost man of expectation,

I think we are so a body strong enough,

Even as we are, to equal with the King.

LORD BARDOLPH. What, is the King but five and twenty thousand?

HASTINGS. To us no more; nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph;

For his divisions, as the times do brawl,

Are in three heads: one power against the French,

And one against Glendower; perforce a third

Must take up us. So is the unfirm King

In three divided; and his coffers sound

With hollow poverty and emptiness.

ARCHBISHOP. That he should draw his several strengths together

And come against us in full puissance

Need not be dreaded.

HASTINGS. If he should do so,

He leaves his back unarm'd, the French and Welsh

Baying at his heels. Never fear that.

LORD BARDOLPH. Who is it like should lead his forces hither?

HASTINGS. The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland;

Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth;

But who is substituted against the French

I have no certain notice.

ARCHBISHOP. Let us on,

And publish the occasion of our arms.

The commonwealth is sick of their own choice;

Their over-greedy love hath surfeited.

An habitation giddy and unsure

Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.

O thou fond many, with what loud applause

Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke

Before he was what thou wouldst have him be!

And being now trimm'd in thine own desires,

Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him

That thou provok'st thyself to cast him up.

So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge

Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard;

And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up,

And howl'st to find it. What trust is in these times?

They that, when Richard liv'd, would have him die

Are now become enamour'd on his grave.

Thou that threw'st dust upon his goodly head,

When through proud London he came sighing on

After th' admired heels of Bolingbroke,

Criest now 'O earth, yield us that king again,

And take thou this!' O thoughts of men accurs'd!

Past and to come seems best; things present, worst.

MOWBRAY. Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?

HASTINGS. We are time's subjects, and time bids be gone.

Exeunt





ACT II. SCENE I. London. A street


Enter HOSTESS with two officers, FANG and SNARE

HOSTESS. Master Fang, have you ent'red the action?

FANG. It is ent'red.

HOSTESS. Where's your yeoman? Is't a lusty yeoman? Will 'a stand

to't?

FANG. Sirrah, where's Snare?

HOSTESS. O Lord, ay! good Master Snare.

SNARE. Here, here.

FANG. Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.

HOSTESS. Yea, good Master Snare; I have ent'red him and all.

SNARE. It may chance cost some of our lives, for he will stab.

HOSTESS. Alas the day! take heed of him; he stabb'd me in mine own

house, and that most beastly. In good faith, 'a cares not what

mischief he does, if his weapon be out; he will foin like any

devil; he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.

FANG. If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.

HOSTESS. No, nor I neither; I'll be at your elbow.

FANG. An I but fist him once; an 'a come but within my vice!

HOSTESS. I am undone by his going; I warrant you, he's an

infinitive thing upon my score. Good Master Fang, hold him sure.

Good Master Snare, let him not scape. 'A comes continuantly to

Pie-corner- saving your manhoods- to buy a saddle; and he is

indited to dinner to the Lubber's Head in Lumbert Street, to

Master Smooth's the silkman. I pray you, since my exion is

ent'red, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be

brought in to his answer. A hundred mark is a long one for a poor

lone woman to bear; and I have borne, and borne, and borne; and

have been fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, from this

day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. There is no

honesty in such dealing; unless a woman should be made an ass and

a beast, to bear every knave's wrong.



Enter SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, PAGE, and BARDOLPH

Yonder he comes; and that arrant malmsey-nose knave, Bardolph,

with him. Do your offices, do your offices, Master Fang and

Master Snare; do me, do me, do me your offices.

FALSTAFF. How now! whose mare's dead? What's the matter?

FANG. Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress Quickly.

FALSTAFF. Away, varlets! Draw, Bardolph. Cut me off the villian's

head. Throw the quean in the channel.

HOSTESS. Throw me in the channel! I'll throw thee in the channel.

Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly rogue! Murder, murder! Ah,

thou honeysuckle villain! wilt thou kill God's officers and the

King's? Ah, thou honey-seed rogue! thou art a honey-seed; a

man-queller and a woman-queller.

FALSTAFF. Keep them off, Bardolph.

FANG. A rescue! a rescue!

HOSTESS. Good people, bring a rescue or two. Thou wot, wot thou!

thou wot, wot ta? Do, do, thou rogue! do, thou hemp-seed!

PAGE. Away, you scullion! you rampallian! you fustilarian!

I'll tickle your catastrophe.



Enter the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE and his men

CHIEF JUSTICE. What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!

HOSTESS. Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you, stand to me.

CHIEF JUSTICE. How now, Sir John! what, are you brawling here?

Doth this become your place, your time, and business?

You should have been well on your way to York.

Stand from him, fellow; wherefore hang'st thou upon him?

HOSTESS. O My most worshipful lord, an't please your Grace, I am a

poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.

CHIEF JUSTICE. For what sum?

HOSTESS. It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all- all I

have. He hath eaten me out of house and home; he hath put all my

substance into that fat belly of his. But I will have some of it

out again, or I will ride thee a nights like a mare.

FALSTAFF. I think I am as like to ride the mare, if I have any

vantage of ground to get up.

CHIEF JUSTICE. How comes this, Sir John? Fie! What man of good

temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? Are you not

ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come by

her own?

FALSTAFF. What is the gross sum that I owe thee?

HOSTESS. Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money

too. Thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in

my Dolphin chamber, at the round table, by a sea-coal fire, upon

Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head for

liking his father to singing-man of Windsor- thou didst swear to

me then, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me my

lady thy wife. Canst thou deny it? Did not goodwife Keech, the

butcher's wife, come in then and call me gossip Quickly? Coming

in to borrow a mess of vinegar, telling us she had a good dish of

prawns, whereby thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told

thee they were ill for green wound? And didst thou not, when she

was gone down stairs, desire me to be no more so familiarity with

such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me madam?

And didst thou not kiss me, and bid me fetch the thirty

shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it, if thou

canst.

FALSTAFF. My lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says up and

down the town that her eldest son is like you. She hath been in

good case, and, the truth is, poverty hath distracted her. But

for these foolish officers, I beseech you I may have redress

against them.

CHIEF JUSTICE. Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted with your

manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. It is not a

confident brow, nor the throng of words that come with such more

than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level

consideration. You have, as it appears to me, practis'd upon the

easy yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your uses

both in purse and in person.

HOSTESS. Yea, in truth, my lord.

CHIEF JUSTICE. Pray thee, peace. Pay her the debt you owe her, and

unpay the villainy you have done with her; the one you may do

with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.

FALSTAFF. My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without reply. You

call honourable boldness impudent sauciness; if a man will make

curtsy and say nothing, he is virtuous. No, my lord, my humble

duty rememb'red, I will not be your suitor. I say to you I do

desire deliverance from these officers, being upon hasty

employment in the King's affairs.

CHIEF JUSTICE. You speak as having power to do wrong; but answer in

th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.

FALSTAFF. Come hither, hostess.



Enter GOWER

CHIEF JUSTICE. Now, Master Gower, what news?

GOWER. The King, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales

Are near at hand. The rest the paper tells. [Gives a letter]

FALSTAFF. As I am a gentleman!

HOSTESS. Faith, you said so before.

FALSTAFF. As I am a gentleman! Come, no more words of it.

HOSTESS. By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fain to pawn

both my plate and the tapestry of my dining-chambers.

FALSTAFF. Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking; and for thy

walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the Prodigal, or

the German hunting, in water-work, is worth a thousand of these

bed-hangers and these fly-bitten tapestries. Let it be ten pound,

if thou canst. Come, and 'twere not for thy humours, there's not

a better wench in England. Go, wash thy face, and draw the

action. Come, thou must not be in this humour with me; dost not

know me? Come, come, I know thou wast set on to this.

HOSTESS. Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles;

i' faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God save me, la!

FALSTAFF. Let it alone; I'll make other shift. You'll be a fool

still.

HOSTESS. Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown.

I hope you'll come to supper. you'll pay me all together?

FALSTAFF. Will I live? [To BARDOLPH] Go, with her, with her; hook

on, hook on.

HOSTESS. Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at supper?

FALSTAFF. No more words; let's have her.

Exeunt HOSTESS, BARDOLPH, and OFFICERS

CHIEF JUSTICE. I have heard better news.

FALSTAFF. What's the news, my lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE. Where lay the King to-night?

GOWER. At Basingstoke, my lord.

FALSTAFF. I hope, my lord, all's well. What is the news, my lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE. Come all his forces back?

GOWER. No; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse,

Are march'd up to my Lord of Lancaster,

Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.

FALSTAFF. Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?

CHIEF JUSTICE. You shall have letters of me presently.

Come, go along with me, good Master Gower.

FALSTAFF. My lord!

CHIEF JUSTICE. What's the matter?

FALSTAFF. Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?

GOWER. I must wait upon my good lord here, I thank you, good Sir

John.

CHIEF JUSTICE. Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to

take soldiers up in counties as you go.

FALSTAFF. Will you sup with me, Master Gower?

CHIEF JUSTICE. What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir

John?

FALSTAFF. Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that

taught them me. This is the right fencing grace, my lord; tap for

tap, and so part fair.

CHIEF JUSTICE. Now, the Lord lighten thee! Thou art a great fool.

Exeunt





SCENE II. London. Another street


Enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS

PRINCE. Before God, I am exceeding weary.

POINS. Is't come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have

attach'd one of so high blood.

PRINCE. Faith, it does me; though it discolours the complexion of

my greatness to acknowledge it. Doth it not show vilely in me to

desire small beer?

POINS. Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to

remember so weak a composition.

PRINCE. Belike then my appetite was not-princely got; for, by my

troth, I do now remember the poor creature, small beer. But

indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my

greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name, or

to know thy face to-morrow, or to take note how many pair of silk

stockings thou hast- viz., these, and those that were thy

peach-colour'd ones- or to bear the inventory of thy shirts- as,

one for superfluity, and another for use! But that the

tennis-court-keeper knows better than I; for it is a low ebb of

linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there; as thou hast

not done a great while, because the rest of thy low countries

have made a shift to eat up thy holland. And God knows whether

those that bawl out of the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his

kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault;

whereupon the world increases, and kindreds are mightily

strengthened.

POINS. How ill it follows, after you have laboured so hard, you

should talk so idly! Tell me, how many good young princes would

do so, their fathers being so sick as yours at this time is?

PRINCE. Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?

POINS. Yes, faith; and let it be an excellent good thing.

PRINCE. It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.

POINS. Go to; I stand the push of your one thing that you will

tell.

PRINCE. Marry, I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad, now

my father is sick; albeit I could tell to thee- as to one it

pleases me, for fault of a better, to call my friend- I could be

sad and sad indeed too.

POINS. Very hardly upon such a subject.

PRINCE. By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devil's book

as thou and Falstaff for obduracy and persistency: let the end

try the man. But I tell thee my heart bleeds inwardly that my

father is so sick; and keeping such vile company as thou art hath

in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.

POINS. The reason?

PRINCE. What wouldst thou think of me if I should weep?

POINS. I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.

PRINCE. It would be every man's thought; and thou art a blessed

fellow to think as every man thinks. Never a man's thought in the

world keeps the road-way better than thine. Every man would think

me an hypocrite indeed. And what accites your most worshipful

thought to think so?

POINS. Why, because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed to

Falstaff.

PRINCE. And to thee.

POINS. By this light, I am well spoke on; I can hear it with mine

own ears. The worst that they can say of me is that I am a second

brother and that I am a proper fellow of my hands; and those two

things, I confess, I cannot help. By the mass, here comes

Bardolph.



Enter BARDOLPH and PAGE

PRINCE. And the boy that I gave Falstaff. 'A had him from me

Christian; and look if the fat villain have not transform'd him

ape.

BARDOLPH. God save your Grace!

PRINCE. And yours, most noble Bardolph!

POINS. Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be

blushing? Wherefore blush you now? What a maidenly man-at-arms

are you become! Is't such a matter to get a pottle-pot's

maidenhead?

PAGE. 'A calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red lattice, and I

could discern no part of his face from the window. At last I

spied his eyes; and methought he had made two holes in the

alewife's new petticoat, and so peep'd through.

PRINCE. Has not the boy profited?

BARDOLPH. Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!

PAGE. Away, you rascally Althaea's dream, away!

PRINCE. Instruct us, boy; what dream, boy?

PAGE. Marry, my lord, Althaea dreamt she was delivered of a

firebrand; and therefore I call him her dream.

PRINCE. A crown's worth of good interpretation. There 'tis, boy.

[Giving a crown]

POINS. O that this blossom could be kept from cankers!

Well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.

BARDOLPH. An you do not make him be hang'd among you, the gallows

shall have wrong.

PRINCE. And how doth thy master, Bardolph?

BARDOLPH. Well, my lord. He heard of your Grace's coming to town.

There's a letter for you.

POINS. Deliver'd with good respect. And how doth the martlemas,

your master?

BARDOLPH. In bodily health, sir.

POINS. Marry, the immortal part needs a physician; but that moves

not him. Though that be sick, it dies not.

PRINCE. I do allow this well to be as familiar with me as my dog;

and he holds his place, for look you how he writes.

POINS. [Reads] 'John Falstaff, knight'- Every man must know that

as oft as he has occasion to name himself, even like those that

are kin to the King; for they never prick their finger but they

say 'There's some of the King's blood spilt.' 'How comes that?'

says he that takes upon him not to conceive. The answer is as

ready as a borrower's cap: 'I am the King's poor cousin, sir.'

PRINCE. Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from

Japhet. But the letter: [Reads] 'Sir John Falstaff, knight, to

the son of the King nearest his father, Harry Prince of Wales,

greeting.'

POINS. Why, this is a certificate.

PRINCE. Peace! [Reads] 'I will imitate the honourable Romans in

brevity.'-

POINS. He sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.

PRINCE. [Reads] 'I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I

leave thee. Be not too familiar with Poins; for he misuses thy

favours so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister Nell.

Repent at idle times as thou mayst, and so farewell.

Thine, by yea and no- which is as much as to say as

thou usest him- JACK FALSTAFF with my familiars,

JOHN with my brothers and sisters, and SIR JOHN with

all Europe.'

POINS. My lord, I'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.

PRINCE. That's to make him eat twenty of his words. But do you use

me thus, Ned? Must I marry your sister?

POINS. God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.

PRINCE. Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits

of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us. Is your master here in

London?

BARDOLPH. Yea, my lord.

PRINCE. Where sups he? Doth the old boar feed in the old frank?

BARDOLPH. At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.

PRINCE. What company?

PAGE. Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.

PRINCE. Sup any women with him?

PAGE. None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and Mistress Doll

Tearsheet.

PRINCE. What pagan may that be?

PAGE. A proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my master's.

PRINCE. Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull.

Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at supper?

POINS. I am your shadow, my lord; I'll follow you.

PRINCE. Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph, no word to your master that

I am yet come to town. There's for your silence.

BARDOLPH. I have no tongue, sir.

PAGE. And for mine, sir, I will govern it.

PRINCE. Fare you well; go. Exeunt BARDOLPH and PAGE

This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.

POINS. I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint Albans and

London.

PRINCE. How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to-night in his

true colours, and not ourselves be seen?

POINS. Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at

his table as drawers.

PRINCE. From a god to a bull? A heavy descension! It was Jove's

case. From a prince to a prentice? A low transformation! That

shall be mine; for in everything the purpose must weigh with the

folly. Follow me, Ned.

Exeunt





SCENE III. Warkworth. Before the castle


Enter NORTHUMBERLAND, LADY NORTHUMBERLAND, and LADY PERCY

NORTHUMBERLAND. I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter,

Give even way unto my rough affairs;

Put not you on the visage of the times

And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND. I have given over, I will speak no more.

Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Alas, sweet wife, my honour is at pawn;

And but my going nothing can redeem it.

LADY PERCY. O, yet, for God's sake, go not to these wars!

The time was, father, that you broke your word,

When you were more endear'd to it than now;

When your own Percy, when my heart's dear Harry,

Threw many a northward look to see his father

Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain.

Who then persuaded you to stay at home?

There were two honours lost, yours and your son's.

For yours, the God of heaven brighten it!

For his, it stuck upon him as the sun

In the grey vault of heaven; and by his light

Did all the chivalry of England move

To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass

Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.

He had no legs that practis'd not his gait;

And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish,

Became the accents of the valiant;

For those who could speak low and tardily

Would turn their own perfection to abuse

To seem like him: so that in speech, in gait,

In diet, in affections of delight,

In military rules, humours of blood,

He was the mark and glass, copy and book,

That fashion'd others. And him- O wondrous him!

O miracle of men!- him did you leave-

Second to none, unseconded by you-

To look upon the hideous god of war

In disadvantage, to abide a field

Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name

Did seem defensible. So you left him.

Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong

To hold your honour more precise and nice

With others than with him! Let them alone.

The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong.

Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers,

To-day might I, hanging on Hotspur's neck,

Have talk'd of Monmouth's grave.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Beshrew your heart,

Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me

With new lamenting ancient oversights.

But I must go and meet with danger there,

Or it will seek me in another place,

And find me worse provided.

LADY NORTHUMBERLAND. O, fly to Scotland

Till that the nobles and the armed commons

Have of their puissance made a little taste.

LADY PERCY. If they get ground and vantage of the King,

Then join you with them, like a rib of steel,

To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves,

First let them try themselves. So did your son;

He was so suff'red; so came I a widow;

And never shall have length of life enough

To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes,

That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven,

For recordation to my noble husband.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind

As with the tide swell'd up unto his height,

That makes a still-stand, running neither way.

Fain would I go to meet the Archbishop,

But many thousand reasons hold me back.

I will resolve for Scotland. There am I,

Till time and vantage crave my company. Exeunt





SCENE IV. London. The Boar's Head Tavern in Eastcheap


Enter FRANCIS and another DRAWER

FRANCIS. What the devil hast thou brought there-apple-johns? Thou

knowest Sir John cannot endure an apple-john.

SECOND DRAWER. Mass, thou say'st true. The Prince once set a dish

of apple-johns before him, and told him there were five more Sir

Johns; and, putting off his hat, said 'I will now take my leave

of these six dry, round, old, withered knights.' It ang'red him

to the heart; but he hath forgot that.

FRANCIS. Why, then, cover and set them down; and see if thou canst

find out Sneak's noise; Mistress Tearsheet would fain hear some

music.



Enter third DRAWER

THIRD DRAWER. Dispatch! The room where they supp'd is too hot;

they'll come in straight.

FRANCIS. Sirrah, here will be the Prince and Master Poins anon; and

they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons; and Sir John must

not know of it. Bardolph hath brought word.

THIRD DRAWER. By the mass, here will be old uds; it will be an

excellent stratagem.

SECOND DRAWER. I'll see if I can find out Sneak.

Exeunt second and third DRAWERS



Enter HOSTESS and DOLL TEARSHEET

HOSTESS. I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an excellent

good temperality. Your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as heart

would desire; and your colour, I warrant you, is as red as any

rose, in good truth, la! But, i' faith, you have drunk too much

canaries; and that's a marvellous searching wine, and it perfumes

the blood ere one can say 'What's this?' How do you now?

DOLL. Better than I was- hem.

HOSTESS. Why, that's well said; a good heart's worth gold.

Lo, here comes Sir John.



Enter FALSTAFF

FALSTAFF. [Singing] 'When Arthur first in court'- Empty the

jordan. [Exit FRANCIS]- [Singing] 'And was a worthy king'- How

now, Mistress Doll!

HOSTESS. Sick of a calm; yea, good faith.

FALSTAFF. So is all her sect; and they be once in a calm, they are

sick.

DOLL. A pox damn you, you muddy rascal! Is that all the comfort you

give me?

FALSTAFF. You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.

DOLL. I make them! Gluttony and diseases make them: I make them

not.

FALSTAFF. If the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to make

the diseases, Doll. We catch of you, Doll, we catch of you; grant

that, my poor virtue, grant that.

DOLL. Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.

FALSTAFF. 'Your brooches, pearls, and ouches.' For to serve bravely

is to come halting off; you know, to come off the breach with his

pike bent bravely, and to surgery bravely; to venture upon the

charg'd chambers bravely-

DOLL. Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!

HOSTESS. By my troth, this is the old fashion; you two never meet

but you fall to some discord. You are both, i' good truth, as

rheumatic as two dry toasts; you cannot one bear with another's

confirmities. What the good-year! one must bear, and that must be

you. You are the weaker vessel, as as they say, the emptier

vessel.

DOLL. Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogs-head?

There's a whole merchant's venture of Bourdeaux stuff in him; you

have not seen a hulk better stuff'd in the hold. Come, I'll be

friends with thee, Jack. Thou art going to the wars; and whether

I shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.



Re-enter FRANCIS

FRANCIS. Sir, Ancient Pistol's below and would speak with you.

DOLL. Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come hither; it is

the foul-mouth'dst rogue in England.

HOSTESS. If he swagger, let him not come here. No, by my faith! I

must live among my neighbours; I'll no swaggerers. I am in good

name and fame with the very best. Shut the door. There comes no

swaggerers here; I have not liv'd all this while to have

swaggering now. Shut the door, I pray you.

FALSTAFF. Dost thou hear, hostess?

HOSTESS. Pray ye, pacify yourself, Sir John; there comes no

swaggerers here.

FALSTAFF. Dost thou hear? It is mine ancient.

HOSTESS. Tilly-fally, Sir John, ne'er tell me; and your ancient

swagg'rer comes not in my doors. I was before Master Tisick, the

debuty, t' other day; and, as he said to me- 'twas no longer ago

than Wednesday last, i' good faith!- 'Neighbour Quickly,' says

he- Master Dumbe, our minister, was by then- 'Neighbour Quickly,'

says he 'receive those that are civil, for' said he 'you are in

an ill name.' Now 'a said so, I can tell whereupon. 'For' says he

'you are an honest woman and well thought on, therefore take heed

what guests you receive. Receive' says he 'no swaggering

companions.' There comes none here. You would bless you to hear

what he said. No, I'll no swagg'rers.

FALSTAFF. He's no swagg'rer, hostess; a tame cheater, i' faith; you

may stroke him as gently as a puppy greyhound. He'll not swagger

with a Barbary hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of

resistance. Call him up, drawer.

Exit FRANCIS

HOSTESS. Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest man my house,

nor no cheater; but I do not love swaggering, by my troth. I am

the worse when one says 'swagger.' Feel, masters, how I shake;

look you, I warrant you.

DOLL. So you do, hostess.

HOSTESS. Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an 'twere an aspen leaf. I

cannot abide swagg'rers.





Enter PISTOL, BARDOLPH, and PAGE

PISTOL. God save you, Sir John!

FALSTAFF. Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I charge you with

a cup of sack; do you discharge upon mine hostess.

PISTOL. I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two bullets.

FALSTAFF. She is pistol-proof, sir; you shall not hardly offend

her.

HOSTESS. Come, I'll drink no proofs nor no bullets. I'll drink no

more than will do me good, for no man's pleasure, I.

PISTOL. Then to you, Mistress Dorothy; I will charge you.

DOLL. Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion. What! you poor,

base, rascally, cheating, lack-linen mate! Away, you mouldy

rogue, away! I am meat for your master.

PISTOL. I know you, Mistress Dorothy.

DOLL. Away, you cut-purse rascal! you filthy bung, away! By this

wine, I'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps, an you play the

saucy cuttle with me. Away, you bottle-ale rascal! you

basket-hilt stale juggler, you! Since when, I pray you, sir?

God's light, with two points on your shoulder? Much!

PISTOL. God let me not live but I will murder your ruff for this.

FALSTAFF. No more, Pistol; I would not have you go off here.

Discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.

HOSTESS. No, good Captain Pistol; not here, sweet captain.

DOLL. Captain! Thou abominable damn'd cheater, art thou not ashamed

to be called captain? An captains were of my mind, they would

truncheon you out, for taking their names upon you before you

have earn'd them. You a captain! you slave, for what? For tearing

a poor whore's ruff in a bawdy-house? He a captain! hang him,

rogue! He lives upon mouldy stew'd prunes and dried cakes. A

captain! God's light, these villains will make the word as odious

as the word 'occupy'; which was an excellent good word before it

was ill sorted. Therefore captains had need look to't.

BARDOLPH. Pray thee go down, good ancient.

FALSTAFF. Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.

PISTOL. Not I! I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear

her; I'll be reveng'd of her.

PAGE. Pray thee go down.

PISTOL. I'll see her damn'd first; to Pluto's damn'd lake, by this

hand, to th' infernal deep, with Erebus and tortures vile also.

Hold hook and line, say I. Down, down, dogs! down, faitors! Have

we not Hiren here?

HOSTESS. Good Captain Peesel, be quiet; 'tis very late, i' faith; I

beseek you now, aggravate your choler.

PISTOL. These be good humours, indeed! Shall packhorses,

And hollow pamper'd jades of Asia,

Which cannot go but thirty mile a day,

Compare with Caesars, and with Cannibals,

And Troiant Greeks? Nay, rather damn them with

King Cerberus; and let the welkin roar.

Shall we fall foul for toys?

HOSTESS. By my troth, Captain, these are very bitter words.

BARDOLPH. Be gone, good ancient; this will grow to a brawl anon.

PISTOL. Die men like dogs! Give crowns like pins! Have we not Hiren

here?

HOSTESS. O' my word, Captain, there's none such here. What the

good-year! do you think I would deny her? For God's sake, be

quiet.

PISTOL. Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis.

Come, give's some sack.

'Si fortune me tormente sperato me contento.'

Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend give fire.

Give me some sack; and, sweetheart, lie thou there.

[Laying down his sword]

Come we to full points here, and are etceteras nothings?

FALSTAFF. Pistol, I would be quiet.

PISTOL. Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What! we have seen the seven

stars.

DOLL. For God's sake thrust him down stairs; I cannot endure such a

fustian rascal.

PISTOL. Thrust him down stairs! Know we not Galloway nags?

FALSTAFF. Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-groat shilling.

Nay, an 'a do nothing but speak nothing, 'a shall be nothing

here.

BARDOLPH. Come, get you down stairs.

PISTOL. What! shall we have incision? Shall we imbrue?

[Snatching up his sword]

Then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days!

Why, then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds

Untwine the Sisters Three! Come, Atropos, I say!

HOSTESS. Here's goodly stuff toward!

FALSTAFF. Give me my rapier, boy.

DOLL. I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee, do not draw.

FALSTAFF. Get you down stairs.

[Drawing and driving PISTOL out]

HOSTESS. Here's a goodly tumult! I'll forswear keeping house afore

I'll be in these tirrits and frights. So; murder, I warrant now.

Alas, alas! put up your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.

Exeunt PISTOL and BARDOLPH

DOLL. I pray thee, Jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone. Ah, you

whoreson little valiant villain, you!

HOSTESS. Are you not hurt i' th' groin? Methought 'a made a shrewd

thrust at your belly.



Re-enter BARDOLPH

FALSTAFF. Have you turn'd him out a doors?

BARDOLPH. Yea, sir. The rascal's drunk. You have hurt him, sir, i'

th' shoulder.

FALSTAFF. A rascal! to brave me!

DOLL. Ah, you sweet little rogue, you! Alas, poor ape, how thou

sweat'st! Come, let me wipe thy face. Come on, you whoreson

chops. Ah, rogue! i' faith, I love thee. Thou art as valorous as

Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better

than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!

FALSTAFF. A rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.

DOLL. Do, an thou dar'st for thy heart. An thou dost, I'll canvass

thee between a pair of sheets.



Enter musicians

PAGE. The music is come, sir.

FALSTAFF. Let them play. Play, sirs. Sit on my knee, Don. A rascal

bragging slave! The rogue fled from me like quick-silver.

DOLL. I' faith, and thou follow'dst him like a church. Thou

whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig, when wilt thou leave

fighting a days and foining a nights, and begin to patch up thine

old body for heaven?



Enter, behind, PRINCE HENRY and POINS disguised as drawers

FALSTAFF. Peace, good Doll! Do not speak like a death's-head; do

not bid me remember mine end.

DOLL. Sirrah, what humour's the Prince of?

FALSTAFF. A good shallow young fellow. 'A would have made a good

pantler; 'a would ha' chipp'd bread well.

DOLL. They say Poins has a good wit.

FALSTAFF. He a good wit! hang him, baboon! His wit's as thick as

Tewksbury mustard; there's no more conceit in him than is in a

mallet.

DOLL. Why does the Prince love him so, then?

FALSTAFF. Because their legs are both of a bigness, and 'a plays at

quoits well, and eats conger and fennel, and drinks off candles'

ends for flap-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and

jumps upon join'd-stools, and swears with a good grace, and wears

his boots very smooth, like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds

no bate with telling of discreet stories; and such other gambol

faculties 'a has, that show a weak mind and an able body, for the

which the Prince admits him. For the Prince himself is such

another; the weight of a hair will turn the scales between their

avoirdupois.

PRINCE. Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?

POINS. Let's beat him before his whore.

PRINCE. Look whe'er the wither'd elder hath not his poll claw'd

like a parrot.

POINS. Is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive

performance?

FALSTAFF. Kiss me, Doll.

PRINCE. Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction! What says th'

almanac to that?

POINS. And look whether the fiery Trigon, his man, be not lisping

to his master's old tables, his note-book, his counsel-keeper.

FALSTAFF. Thou dost give me flattering busses.

DOLL. By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.

FALSTAFF. I am old, I am old.

DOLL. I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young boy of

them all.

FALSTAFF. What stuff wilt have a kirtle of? I shall receive money a

Thursday. Shalt have a cap to-morrow. A merry song, come. 'A

grows late; we'll to bed. Thou't forget me when I am gone.

DOLL. By my troth, thou't set me a-weeping, an thou say'st so.

Prove that ever I dress myself handsome till thy return. Well,

hearken a' th' end.

FALSTAFF. Some sack, Francis.

PRINCE & POINS. Anon, anon, sir. [Advancing]

FALSTAFF. Ha! a bastard son of the King's? And art thou not Poins

his brother?

PRINCE. Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou

lead!

FALSTAFF. A better than thou. I am a gentleman: thou art a drawer.

PRINCE. Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.

HOSTESS. O, the Lord preserve thy Grace! By my troth, welcome to

London. Now the Lord bless that sweet face of thine. O Jesu, are

you come from Wales?

FALSTAFF. Thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, by this light

flesh and corrupt blood, thou art welcome.

[Leaning his band upon DOLL]

DOLL. How, you fat fool! I scorn you.

POINS. My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and turn all

to a merriment, if you take not the heat.

PRINCE. YOU whoreson candle-mine, you, how vilely did you speak of

me even now before this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman!

HOSTESS. God's blessing of your good heart! and so she is, by my

troth.

FALSTAFF. Didst thou hear me?

PRINCE. Yea; and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by

Gadshill. You knew I was at your back, and spoke it on purpose to

try my patience.

FALSTAFF. No, no, no; not so; I did not think thou wast within

hearing.

PRINCE. I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and

then I know how to handle you.

FALSTAFF. No abuse, Hal, o' mine honour; no abuse.

PRINCE. Not- to dispraise me, and call me pander, and

bread-chipper, and I know not what!

FALSTAFF. No abuse, Hal.

POINS. No abuse!

FALSTAFF. No abuse, Ned, i' th' world; honest Ned, none. I

disprais'd him before the wicked- that the wicked might not fall

in love with thee; in which doing, I have done the part of a

careful friend and a true subject; and thy father is to give me

thanks for it. No abuse, Hal; none, Ned, none; no, faith, boys,

none.

PRINCE. See now, whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not

make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us? Is

she of the wicked? Is thine hostess here of the wicked? Or is thy

boy of the wicked? Or honest Bardolph, whose zeal burns in his

nose, of the wicked?

POINS. Answer, thou dead elm, answer.

FALSTAFF. The fiend hath prick'd down Bardolph irrecoverable; and

his face is Lucifer's privy-kitchen, where he doth nothing but

roast malt-worms. For the boy- there is a good angel about him;

but the devil outbids him too.

PRINCE. For the women?

FALSTAFF. For one of them- she's in hell already, and burns poor

souls. For th' other- I owe her money; and whether she be damn'd

for that, I know not.

HOSTESS. No, I warrant you.

FALSTAFF. No, I think thou art not; I think thou art quit for that.

Marry, there is another indictment upon thee for suffering flesh

to be eaten in thy house, contrary to the law; for the which I

think thou wilt howl.

HOSTESS. All vict'lers do so. What's a joint of mutton or two in a

whole Lent?

PRINCE. You, gentlewoman-

DOLL. What says your Grace?

FALSTAFF. His Grace says that which his flesh rebels against.

[Knocking within]

HOSTESS. Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th' door there,

Francis.



Enter PETO

PRINCE. Peto, how now! What news?

PETO. The King your father is at Westminster;

And there are twenty weak and wearied posts

Come from the north; and as I came along

I met and overtook a dozen captains,

Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns,

And asking every one for Sir John Falstaff.

PRINCE. By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame

So idly to profane the precious time,

When tempest of commotion, like the south,

Borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt

And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.

Give me my sword and cloak. Falstaff, good night.



Exeunt PRINCE, POINS, PETO, and BARDOLPH

FALSTAFF. Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we

must hence, and leave it unpick'd. [Knocking within] More

knocking at the door!



Re-enter BARDOLPH

How now! What's the matter?

BARDOLPH. You must away to court, sir, presently;

A dozen captains stay at door for you.

FALSTAFF. [To the PAGE]. Pay the musicians, sirrah.- Farewell,

hostess; farewell, Doll. You see, my good wenches, how men of

merit are sought after; the undeserver may sleep, when the man of

action is call'd on. Farewell, good wenches. If I be not sent

away post, I will see you again ere I go.

DOLL. I cannot speak. If my heart be not ready to burst!

Well, sweet Jack, have a care of thyself.

FALSTAFF. Farewell, farewell.

Exeunt FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH

HOSTESS. Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these twenty-nine

years, come peascod-time; but an honester and truer-hearted man

-well fare thee well.

BARDOLPH. [ Within] Mistress Tearsheet!

HOSTESS. What's the matter?

BARDOLPH. [ Within] Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my master.

HOSTESS. O, run Doll, run, run, good Come. [To BARDOLPH] She

comes blubber'd.- Yea, will you come, Doll? Exeunt





ACT III. SCENE I. Westminster. The palace


Enter the KING in his nightgown, with a page

KING. Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick;

But, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters

And well consider of them. Make good speed. Exit page

How many thousands of my poorest subjects

Are at this hour asleep! O sleep, O gentle sleep,

Nature's soft nurse, how have I frightened thee,

That thou no more will weigh my eyelids down,

And steep my senses in forgetfulness?

Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,

Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,

And hush'd with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,

Than in the perfum'd chambers of the great,

Under the canopies of costly state,

And lull'd with sound of sweetest melody?

O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile

In loathsome beds, and leav'st the kingly couch

A watch-case or a common 'larum-bell?

Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast

Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains

In cradle of the rude imperious surge,

And in the visitation of the winds,

Who take the ruffian billows by the top,

Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them

With deafing clamour in the slippery clouds,

That with the hurly death itself awakes?

Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose

To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude;

And in the calmest and most stillest night,

With all appliances and means to boot,

Deny it to a king? Then, happy low, lie down!

Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.



Enter WARWICK and Surrey

WARWICK. Many good morrows to your Majesty!

KING. Is it good morrow, lords?

WARWICK. 'Tis one o'clock, and past.

KING. Why then, good morrow to you all, my lords.

Have you read o'er the letters that I sent you?

WARWICK. We have, my liege.

KING. Then you perceive the body of our kingdom

How foul it is; what rank diseases grow,

And with what danger, near the heart of it.

WARWICK. It is but as a body yet distempered;

Which to his former strength may be restored

With good advice and little medicine.

My Lord Northumberland will soon be cool'd.

KING. O God! that one might read the book of fate,

And see the revolution of the times

Make mountains level, and the continent,

Weary of solid firmness, melt itself

Into the sea; and other times to see

The beachy girdle of the ocean

Too wide for Neptune's hips; how chances mock,

And changes fill the cup of alteration

With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,

The happiest youth, viewing his progress through,

What perils past, what crosses to ensue,

Would shut the book and sit him down and die.

'Tis not ten years gone

Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends,

Did feast together, and in two years after

Were they at wars. It is but eight years since

This Percy was the man nearest my soul;

Who like a brother toil'd in my affairs

And laid his love and life under my foot;

Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard

Gave him defiance. But which of you was by-

[To WARWICK] You, cousin Nevil, as I may remember-

When Richard, with his eye brim full of tears,

Then check'd and rated by Northumberland,

Did speak these words, now prov'd a prophecy?

'Northumberland, thou ladder by the which

My cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throne'-

Though then, God knows, I had no such intent

But that necessity so bow'd the state

That I and greatness were compell'd to kiss-

'The time shall come'- thus did he follow it-

'The time will come that foul sin, gathering head,

Shall break into corruption' so went on,

Foretelling this same time's condition

And the division of our amity.

WARWICK. There is a history in all men's lives,

Figuring the natures of the times deceas'd;

The which observ'd, a man may prophesy,

With a near aim, of the main chance of things

As yet not come to life, who in their seeds

And weak beginning lie intreasured.

Such things become the hatch and brood of time;

And, by the necessary form of this,

King Richard might create a perfect guess

That great Northumberland, then false to him,

Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness;

Which should not find a ground to root upon

Unless on you.

KING. Are these things then necessities?

Then let us meet them like necessities;

And that same word even now cries out on us.

They say the Bishop and Northumberland

Are fifty thousand strong.

WARWICK. It cannot be, my lord.

Rumour doth double, like the voice and echo,

The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace

To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord,

The powers that you already have sent forth

Shall bring this prize in very easily.

To comfort you the more, I have receiv'd

A certain instance that Glendower is dead.

Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill;

And these unseasoned hours perforce must ad

Unto your sickness.

KING. I will take your counsel.

And, were these inward wars once out of hand,

We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land. Exeunt





SCENE II. Gloucestershire. Before Justice, SHALLOW'S house


Enter SHALLOW and SILENCE, meeting; MOULDY, SHADOW, WART, FEEBLE, BULLCALF, and servants behind

SHALLOW. Come on, come on, come on; give me your hand, sir; give me

your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by the rood! And how doth my

good cousin Silence?

SILENCE. Good morrow, good cousin Shallow.

SHALLOW. And how doth my cousin, your bed-fellow? and your fairest

daughter and mine, my god-daughter Ellen?

SILENCE. Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow!

SHALLOW. By yea and no, sir. I dare say my cousin William is become

a good scholar; he is at Oxford still, is he not?

SILENCE. Indeed, sir, to my cost.

SHALLOW. 'A must, then, to the Inns o' Court shortly. I was once of

Clement's Inn; where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.

SILENCE. You were call'd 'lusty Shallow' then, cousin.

SHALLOW. By the mass, I was call'd anything; and I would have done

anything indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little

John Doit of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis

Pickbone, and Will Squele a Cotsole man- you had not four such

swinge-bucklers in all the Inns of Court again. And I may say to

you we knew where the bona-robas were, and had the best of them

all at commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir John, boy,

and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.

SILENCE. This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon about

soldiers?

SHALLOW. The same Sir John, the very same. I see him break

Scoggin's head at the court gate, when 'a was a crack not thus

high; and the very same day did I fight with one Sampson

Stockfish, a fruiterer, behind Gray's Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the mad

days that I have spent! and to see how many of my old

acquaintance are dead!

SILENCE. We shall all follow, cousin.

SHALLOW. Certain, 'tis certain; very sure, very sure. Death, as the

Psalmist saith, is certain to all; all shall die. How a good yoke

of bullocks at Stamford fair?

SILENCE. By my troth, I was not there.

SHALLOW. Death is certain. Is old Double of your town living yet?

SILENCE. Dead, sir.

SHALLOW. Jesu, Jesu, dead! drew a good bow; and dead! 'A shot a

fine shoot. John a Gaunt loved him well, and betted much money on

his head. Dead! 'A would have clapp'd i' th' clout at twelve

score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen

and a half, that it would have done a man's heart good to see.

How a score of ewes now?

SILENCE. Thereafter as they be- a score of good ewes may be worth

ten pounds.

SHALLOW. And is old Double dead?



Enter BARDOLPH, and one with him

SILENCE. Here come two of Sir John Falstaffs men, as I think.

SHALLOW. Good morrow, honest gentlemen.

BARDOLPH. I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?

SHALLOW. I am Robert Shallow, sir, a poor esquire of this county,

and one of the King's justices of the peace. What is your good

pleasure with me?

BARDOLPH. My captain, sir, commends him to you; my captain, Sir

John Falstaff- a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant

leader.

SHALLOW. He greets me well, sir; I knew him a good back-sword man.

How doth the good knight? May I ask how my lady his wife doth?

BARDOLPH. Sir, pardon; a soldier is better accommodated than with a

wife.

SHALLOW. It is well said, in faith, sir; and it is well said indeed

too. 'Better accommodated!' It is good; yea, indeed, is it. Good

phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable.

'Accommodated!' It comes of accommodo. Very good; a good phrase.

BARDOLPH. Pardon, sir; I have heard the word. 'Phrase' call you it?

By this day, I know not the phrase; but I will maintain the word

with my sword to be a soldier-like word, and a word of exceeding

good command, by heaven. Accommodated: that is, when a man is, as

they say, accommodated; or, when a man is being-whereby 'a may be

thought to be accommodated; which is an excellent thing.



Enter FALSTAFF

SHALLOW. It is very just. Look, here comes good Sir John. Give me

your good hand, give me your worship's good hand. By my troth,

you like well and bear your years very well. Welcome, good Sir

John.

FALSTAFF. I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert Shallow.

Master Surecard, as I think?

SHALLOW. No, Sir John; it is my cousin Silence, in commission with

me.

FALSTAFF. Good Master Silence, it well befits you should be of the

peace.

SILENCE. Your good worship is welcome.

FALSTAFF. Fie! this is hot weather. Gentlemen, have you provided me

here half a dozen sufficient men?

SHALLOW. Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?

FALSTAFF. Let me see them, I beseech you.

SHALLOW. Where's the roll? Where's the roll? Where's the roll? Let

me see, let me see, let me see. So, so, so, so,- so, so- yea,

marry, sir. Rafe Mouldy! Let them appear as I call; let them do

so, let them do so. Let me see; where is Mouldy?

MOULDY. Here, an't please you.

SHALLOW. What think you, Sir John? A good-limb'd fellow; young,

strong, and of good friends.

FALSTAFF. Is thy name Mouldy?

MOULDY. Yea, an't please you.

FALSTAFF. 'Tis the more time thou wert us'd.

SHALLOW. Ha, ha, ha! most excellent, i' faith! Things that are

mouldy lack use. Very singular good! In faith, well said, Sir

John; very well said.

FALSTAFF. Prick him.

MOULDY. I was prick'd well enough before, an you could have let me

alone. My old dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry

and her drudgery. You need not to have prick'd me; there are

other men fitter to go out than I.

FALSTAFF. Go to; peace, Mouldy; you shall go. Mouldy, it is time

you were spent.

MOULDY. Spent!

SHALLOW. Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside; know you where you are?

For th' other, Sir John- let me see. Simon Shadow!

FALSTAFF. Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under. He's like to be

a cold soldier.

SHALLOW. Where's Shadow?

SHADOW. Here, sir.

FALSTAFF. Shadow, whose son art thou?

SHADOW. My mother's son, sir.

FALSTAFF. Thy mother's son! Like enough; and thy father's shadow.

So the son of the female is the shadow of the male. It is often

so indeed; but much of the father's substance!

SHALLOW. Do you like him, Sir John?

FALSTAFF. Shadow will serve for summer. Prick him; for we have a

number of shadows fill up the muster-book.

SHALLOW. Thomas Wart!

FALSTAFF. Where's he?

WART. Here, sir.

FALSTAFF. Is thy name Wart?

WART. Yea, sir.

FALSTAFF. Thou art a very ragged wart.

SHALLOW. Shall I prick him, Sir John?

FALSTAFF. It were superfluous; for his apparel is built upon his

back, and the whole frame stands upon pins. Prick him no more.

SHALLOW. Ha, ha, ha! You can do it, sir; you can do it. I commend

you well. Francis Feeble!

FEEBLE. Here, sir.

FALSTAFF. What trade art thou, Feeble?

FEEBLE. A woman's tailor, sir.

SHALLOW. Shall I prick him, sir?

FALSTAFF. You may; but if he had been a man's tailor, he'd ha'

prick'd you. Wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy's battle as

thou hast done in a woman's petticoat?

FEEBLE. I will do my good will, sir; you can have no more.

FALSTAFF. Well said, good woman's tailor! well said, courageous

Feeble! Thou wilt be as valiant as the wrathful dove or most

magnanimous mouse. Prick the woman's tailor- well, Master

Shallow, deep, Master Shallow.

FEEBLE. I would Wart might have gone, sir.

FALSTAFF. I would thou wert a man's tailor, that thou mightst mend

him and make him fit to go. I cannot put him to a private

soldier, that is the leader of so many thousands. Let that

suffice, most forcible Feeble.

FEEBLE. It shall suffice, sir.

FALSTAFF. I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble. Who is next?

SHALLOW. Peter Bullcalf o' th' green!

FALSTAFF. Yea, marry, let's see Bullcalf.

BULLCALF. Here, sir.

FALSTAFF. Fore God, a likely fellow! Come, prick me Bullcalf till

he roar again.

BULLCALF. O Lord! good my lord captain-

FALSTAFF. What, dost thou roar before thou art prick'd?

BULLCALF. O Lord, sir! I am a diseased man.

FALSTAFF. What disease hast thou?

BULLCALF. A whoreson cold, sir, a cough, sir, which I caught with

ringing in the King's affairs upon his coronation day, sir.

FALSTAFF. Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown. We will have

away thy cold; and I will take such order that thy friends shall

ring for thee. Is here all?

SHALLOW. Here is two more call'd than your number. You must have

but four here, sir; and so, I pray you, go in with me to dinner.

FALSTAFF. Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry

dinner. I am glad to see you, by my troth, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW. O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night in the

windmill in Saint George's Field?

FALSTAFF. No more of that, Master Shallow, no more of that.

SHALLOW. Ha, 'twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork alive?

FALSTAFF. She lives, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW. She never could away with me.

FALSTAFF. Never, never; she would always say she could not abide

Master Shallow.

SHALLOW. By the mass, I could anger her to th' heart. She was then

a bona-roba. Doth she hold her own well?

FALSTAFF. Old, old, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW. Nay, she must be old; she cannot choose but be old;

certain she's old; and had Robin Nightwork, by old Nightwork,

before I came to Clement's Inn.

SILENCE. That's fifty-five year ago.

SHALLOW. Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that that this

knight and I have seen! Ha, Sir John, said I well?

FALSTAFF. We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.

SHALLOW. That we have, that we have, that we have; in faith, Sir

John, we have. Our watchword was 'Hem, boys!' Come, let's to

dinner; come, let's to dinner. Jesus, the days that we have seen!

Come, come.

Exeunt FALSTAFF and the JUSTICES

BULLCALF. Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend; and

here's four Harry ten shillings in French crowns for you. In very

truth, sir, I had as lief be hang'd, sir, as go. And yet, for

mine own part, sir, I do not care; but rather because I am

unwilling and, for mine own part, have a desire to stay with my

friends; else, sir, I did not care for mine own part so much.

BARDOLPH. Go to; stand aside.

MOULDY. And, good Master Corporal Captain, for my old dame's sake,

stand my friend. She has nobody to do anything about her when I

am gone; and she is old, and cannot help herself. You shall have

forty, sir.

BARDOLPH. Go to; stand aside.

FEEBLE. By my troth, I care not; a man can die but once; we owe God

a death. I'll ne'er bear a base mind. An't be my destiny, so;

an't be not, so. No man's too good to serve 's Prince; and, let

it go which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the

next.

BARDOLPH. Well said; th'art a good fellow.

FEEBLE. Faith, I'll bear no base mind.



Re-enter FALSTAFF and the JUSTICES

FALSTAFF. Come, sir, which men shall I have?

SHALLOW. Four of which you please.

BARDOLPH. Sir, a word with you. I have three pound to free Mouldy

and Bullcalf.

FALSTAFF. Go to; well.

SHALLOW. Come, Sir John, which four will you have?

FALSTAFF. Do you choose for me.

SHALLOW. Marry, then- Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and Shadow.

FALSTAFF. Mouldy and Bullcalf: for you, Mouldy, stay at home till

you are past service; and for your part, Bullcalf, grow you come

unto it. I will none of you.

SHALLOW. Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong. They are your

likeliest men, and I would have you serv'd with the best.

FALSTAFF. Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to choose a man?

Care I for the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk, and big

assemblance of a man! Give me the spirit, Master Shallow. Here's

Wart; you see what a ragged appearance it is. 'A shall charge you

and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer's hammer, come

off and on swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer's bucket.

And this same half-fac'd fellow, Shadow- give me this man. He

presents no mark to the enemy; the foeman may with as great aim

level at the edge of a penknife. And, for a retreat- how swiftly

will this Feeble, the woman's tailor, run off! O, give me the

spare men, and spare me the great ones. Put me a caliver into

Wart's hand, Bardolph.

BARDOLPH. Hold, Wart. Traverse- thus, thus, thus.

FALSTAFF. Come, manage me your caliver. So- very well. Go to; very

good; exceeding good. O, give me always a little, lean, old,

chopt, bald shot. Well said, i' faith, Wart; th'art a good scab.

Hold, there's a tester for thee.

SHALLOW. He is not his craft's master, he doth not do it right. I

remember at Mile-end Green, when I lay at Clement's Inn- I was

then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's show- there was a little quiver

fellow, and 'a would manage you his piece thus; and 'a would

about and about, and come you in and come you in. 'Rah, tah,

tah!' would 'a say; 'Bounce!' would 'a say; and away again would

'a go, and again would 'a come. I shall ne'er see such a fellow.

FALSTAFF. These fellows will do well. Master Shallow, God keep you!

Master Silence, I will not use many words with you: Fare you

well! Gentlemen both, I thank you. I must a dozen mile to-night.

Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.

SHALLOW. Sir John, the Lord bless you; God prosper your affairs;

God send us peace! At your return, visit our house; let our old

acquaintance be renewed. Peradventure I will with ye to the

court.

FALSTAFF. Fore God, would you would.

SHALLOW. Go to; I have spoke at a word. God keep you.

FALSTAFF. Fare you well, gentle gentlemen. [Exeunt JUSTICES] On,

Bardolph; lead the men away. [Exeunt all but FALSTAFF] As I

return, I will fetch off these justices. I do see the bottom of

justice Shallow. Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this

vice of lying! This same starv'd justice hath done nothing but

prate to me of the wildness of his youth and the feats he hath

done about Turnbull Street; and every third word a lie, duer paid

to the hearer than the Turk's tribute. I do remember him at

Clement's Inn, like a man made after supper of a cheese-paring.

When 'a was naked, he was for all the world like a fork'd radish,

with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife. 'A was so

forlorn that his dimensions to any thick sight were invisible. 'A

was the very genius of famine; yet lecherous as a monkey, and the

whores call'd him mandrake. 'A came ever in the rearward of the

fashion, and sung those tunes to the overscutch'd huswifes that

he heard the carmen whistle, and sware they were his fancies or

his good-nights. And now is this Vice's dagger become a squire,

and talks as familiarly of John a Gaunt as if he had been sworn

brother to him; and I'll be sworn 'a ne'er saw him but once in

the Tiltyard; and then he burst his head for crowding among the

marshal's men. I saw it, and told John a Gaunt he beat his own

name; for you might have thrust him and all his apparel into an

eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him, a

court- and now has he land and beeves. Well, I'll be acquainted

with him if I return; and 't shall go hard but I'll make him a

philosopher's two stones to me. If the young dace be a bait for

the old pike, I see no reason in the law of nature but I may snap

at him. Let time shape, and there an end. Exit





ACT IV. SCENE I. Yorkshire. Within the Forest of Gaultree


Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, MOWBRAY, HASTINGS, and others

ARCHBISHOP. What is this forest call'd

HASTINGS. 'Tis Gaultree Forest, an't shall please your Grace.

ARCHBISHOP. Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth

To know the numbers of our enemies.

HASTINGS. We have sent forth already.

ARCHBISHOP. 'Tis well done.

My friends and brethren in these great affairs,

I must acquaint you that I have receiv'd

New-dated letters from Northumberland;

Their cold intent, tenour, and substance, thus:

Here doth he wish his person, with such powers

As might hold sortance with his quality,

The which he could not levy; whereupon

He is retir'd, to ripe his growing fortunes,

To Scotland; and concludes in hearty prayers

That your attempts may overlive the hazard

And fearful meeting of their opposite.

MOWBRAY. Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground

And dash themselves to pieces.



Enter A MESSENGER

HASTINGS. Now, what news?

MESSENGER. West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,

In goodly form comes on the enemy;

And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number

Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.

MOWBRAY. The just proportion that we gave them out.

Let us sway on and face them in the field.



Enter WESTMORELAND

ARCHBISHOP. What well-appointed leader fronts us here?

MOWBRAY. I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.

WESTMORELAND. Health and fair greeting from our general,

The Prince, Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.

ARCHBISHOP. Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace,

What doth concern your coming.

WESTMORELAND. Then, my lord,

Unto your Grace do I in chief address

The substance of my speech. If that rebellion

Came like itself, in base and abject routs,

Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rags,

And countenanc'd by boys and beggary-

I say, if damn'd commotion so appear'd

In his true, native, and most proper shape,

You, reverend father, and these noble lords,

Had not been here to dress the ugly form

Of base and bloody insurrection

With your fair honours. You, Lord Archbishop,

Whose see is by a civil peace maintain'd,

Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch'd,

Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutor'd,

Whose white investments figure innocence,

The dove, and very blessed spirit of peace-

Wherefore you do so ill translate yourself

Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,

Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war;

Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,

Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine

To a loud trumpet and a point of war?

ARCHBISHOP. Wherefore do I this? So the question stands.

Briefly to this end: we are all diseas'd

And with our surfeiting and wanton hours

Have brought ourselves into a burning fever,

And we must bleed for it; of which disease

Our late King, Richard, being infected, died.

But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland,

I take not on me here as a physician;

Nor do I as an enemy to peace

Troop in the throngs of military men;

But rather show awhile like fearful war

To diet rank minds sick of happiness,

And purge th' obstructions which begin to stop

Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly.

I have in equal balance justly weigh'd

What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer,

And find our griefs heavier than our offences.

We see which way the stream of time doth run

And are enforc'd from our most quiet there

By the rough torrent of occasion;

And have the summary of all our griefs,

When time shall serve, to show in articles;

Which long ere this we offer'd to the King,

And might by no suit gain our audience:

When we are wrong'd, and would unfold our griefs,

We are denied access unto his person,

Even by those men that most have done us wrong.

The dangers of the days but newly gone,

Whose memory is written on the earth

With yet appearing blood, and the examples

Of every minute's instance, present now,

Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms;

Not to break peace, or any branch of it,

But to establish here a peace indeed,

Concurring both in name and quality.

WESTMORELAND. When ever yet was your appeal denied;

Wherein have you been galled by the King;

What peer hath been suborn'd to grate on you

That you should seal this lawless bloody book

Of forg'd rebellion with a seal divine,

And consecrate commotion's bitter edge?

ARCHBISHOP. My brother general, the commonwealth,

To brother horn an household cruelty,

I make my quarrel in particular.

WESTMORELAND. There is no need of any such redress;

Or if there were, it not belongs to you.

MOWBRAY. Why not to him in part, and to us all

That feel the bruises of the days before,

And suffer the condition of these times

To lay a heavy and unequal hand

Upon our honours?

WESTMORELAND. O my good Lord Mowbray,

Construe the times to their necessities,

And you shall say, indeed, it is the time,

And not the King, that doth you injuries.

Yet, for your part, it not appears to me,

Either from the King or in the present time,

That you should have an inch of any ground

To build a grief on. Were you not restor'd

To all the Duke of Norfolk's signiories,

Your noble and right well-rememb'red father's?

MOWBRAY. What thing, in honour, had my father lost

That need to be reviv'd and breath'd in me?

The King that lov'd him, as the state stood then,

Was force perforce compell'd to banish him,

And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he,

Being mounted and both roused in their seats,

Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,

Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,

Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel,

And the loud trumpet blowing them together-

Then, then, when there was nothing could have stay'd

My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,

O, when the King did throw his warder down-

His own life hung upon the staff he threw-

Then threw he down himself, and all their lives

That by indictment and by dint of sword

Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.

WESTMORELAND. You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not what.

The Earl of Hereford was reputed then

In England the most valiant gentleman.

Who knows on whom fortune would then have smil'd?

But if your father had been victor there,

He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry;

For all the country, in a general voice,

Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love

Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on,

And bless'd and grac'd indeed more than the King.

But this is mere digression from my purpose.

Here come I from our princely general

To know your griefs; to tell you from his Grace

That he will give you audience; and wherein

It shall appear that your demands are just,

You shall enjoy them, everything set off

That might so much as think you enemies.

MOWBRAY. But he hath forc'd us to compel this offer;

And it proceeds from policy, not love.

WESTMORELAND. Mowbray. you overween to take it so.

This offer comes from mercy, not from fear;

For, lo! within a ken our army lies-

Upon mine honour, all too confident

To give admittance to a thought of fear.

Our battle is more full of names than yours,

Our men more perfect in the use of arms,

Our armour all as strong, our cause the best;

Then reason will our hearts should be as good.

Say you not, then, our offer is compell'd.

MOWBRAY. Well, by my will we shall admit no parley.

WESTMORELAND. That argues but the shame of your offence:

A rotten case abides no handling.

HASTINGS. Hath the Prince John a full commission,

In very ample virtue of his father,

To hear and absolutely to determine

Of what conditions we shall stand upon?

WESTMORELAND. That is intended in the general's name.

I muse you make so slight a question.

ARCHBISHOP. Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule,

For this contains our general grievances.

Each several article herein redress'd,

All members of our cause, both here and hence,

That are insinewed to this action,

Acquitted by a true substantial form,

And present execution of our wills

To us and to our purposes confin'd-

We come within our awful banks again,

And knit our powers to the arm of peace.

WESTMORELAND. This will I show the general. Please you, lords,

In sight of both our battles we may meet;

And either end in peace- which God so frame!-

Or to the place of diff'rence call the swords

Which must decide it.

ARCHBISHOP. My lord, we will do so. Exit WESTMORELAND

MOWBRAY. There is a thing within my bosom tells me

That no conditions of our peace can stand.

HASTINGS. Fear you not that: if we can make our peace

Upon such large terms and so absolute

As our conditions shall consist upon,

Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.

MOWBRAY. Yea, but our valuation shall be such

That every slight and false-derived cause,

Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason,

Shall to the King taste of this action;

That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,

We shall be winnow'd with so rough a wind

That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff,

And good from bad find no partition.

ARCHBISHOP. No, no, my lord. Note this: the King is weary

Of dainty and such picking grievances;

For he hath found to end one doubt by death

Revives two greater in the heirs of life;

And therefore will he wipe his tables clean,

And keep no tell-tale to his memory

That may repeat and history his los

To new remembrance. For full well he knows

He cannot so precisely weed this land

As his misdoubts present occasion:

His foes are so enrooted with his friends

That, plucking to unfix an enemy,

He doth unfasten so and shake a friend.

So that this land, like an offensive wife

That hath enrag'd him on to offer strokes,

As he is striking, holds his infant up,

And hangs resolv'd correction in the arm

That was uprear'd to execution.

HASTINGS. Besides, the King hath wasted all his rods

On late offenders, that he now doth lack

The very instruments of chastisement;

So that his power, like to a fangless lion,

May offer, but not hold.

ARCHBISHOP. 'Tis very true;

And therefore be assur'd, my good Lord Marshal,

If we do now make our atonement well,

Our peace will, like a broken limb united,

Grow stronger for the breaking.

MOWBRAY. Be it so.

Here is return'd my Lord of Westmoreland.



Re-enter WESTMORELAND

WESTMORELAND. The Prince is here at hand. Pleaseth your lordship

To meet his Grace just distance 'tween our armies?

MOWBRAY. Your Grace of York, in God's name then, set forward.

ARCHBISHOP. Before, and greet his Grace. My lord, we come.

Exeunt





SCENE II. Another part of the forest


Enter, from one side, MOWBRAY, attended; afterwards, the ARCHBISHOP,

HASTINGS, and others; from the other side, PRINCE JOHN of LANCASTER,

WESTMORELAND, OFFICERS, and others



PRINCE JOHN. You are well encount'red here, my cousin Mowbray.

Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop;

And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.

My Lord of York, it better show'd with you

When that your flock, assembled by the bell,

Encircled you to hear with reverence

Your exposition on the holy text

Than now to see you here an iron man,

Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,

Turning the word to sword, and life to death.

That man that sits within a monarch's heart

And ripens in the sunshine of his favour,

Would he abuse the countenance of the king,

Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach

In shadow of such greatness! With you, Lord Bishop,

It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken

How deep you were within the books of God?

To us the speaker in His parliament,

To us th' imagin'd voice of God himself,

The very opener and intelligencer

Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven,

And our dull workings. O, who shall believe

But you misuse the reverence of your place,

Employ the countenance and grace of heav'n

As a false favourite doth his prince's name,

In deeds dishonourable? You have ta'en up,

Under the counterfeited zeal of God,

The subjects of His substitute, my father,

And both against the peace of heaven and him

Have here up-swarm'd them.

ARCHBISHOP. Good my Lord of Lancaster,

I am not here against your father's peace;

But, as I told my Lord of Westmoreland,

The time misord'red doth, in common sense,

Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form

To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace

The parcels and particulars of our grief,

The which hath been with scorn shov'd from the court,

Whereon this hydra son of war is born;

Whose dangerous eyes may well be charm'd asleep

With grant of our most just and right desires;

And true obedience, of this madness cur'd,

Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.

MOWBRAY. If not, we ready are to try our fortunes

To the last man.

HASTINGS. And though we here fall down,

We have supplies to second our attempt.

If they miscarry, theirs shall second them;

And so success of mischief shall be born,

And heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up

Whiles England shall have generation.

PRINCE JOHN. YOU are too shallow, Hastings, much to shallow,

To sound the bottom of the after-times.

WESTMORELAND. Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly

How far forth you do like their articles.

PRINCE JOHN. I like them all and do allow them well;

And swear here, by the honour of my blood,

My father's purposes have been mistook;

And some about him have too lavishly

Wrested his meaning and authority.

My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redress'd;

Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you,

Discharge your powers unto their several counties,

As we will ours; and here, between the armies,

Let's drink together friendly and embrace,

That all their eyes may bear those tokens home

Of our restored love and amity.

ARCHBISHOP. I take your princely word for these redresses.

PRINCE JOHN. I give it you, and will maintain my word;

And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.

HASTINGS. Go, Captain, and deliver to the army

This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part.

I know it will please them. Hie thee, Captain.

Exit Officer

ARCHBISHOP. To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland.

WESTMORELAND. I pledge your Grace; and if you knew what pains

I have bestow'd to breed this present peace,

You would drink freely; but my love to ye

Shall show itself more openly hereafter.

ARCHBISHOP. I do not doubt you.

WESTMORELAND. I am glad of it.

Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.

MOWBRAY. You wish me health in very happy season,

For I am on the sudden something ill.

ARCHBISHOP. Against ill chances men are ever merry;

But heaviness foreruns the good event.

WESTMORELAND. Therefore be merry, coz; since sudden sorrow

Serves to say thus, 'Some good thing comes to-morrow.'

ARCHBISHOP. Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.

MOWBRAY. So much the worse, if your own rule be true.

[Shouts within]

PRINCE JOHN. The word of peace is rend'red. Hark, how they shout!

MOWBRAY. This had been cheerful after victory.

ARCHBISHOP. A peace is of the nature of a conquest;

For then both parties nobly are subdu'd,

And neither party loser.

PRINCE JOHN. Go, my lord,

And let our army be discharged too.

Exit WESTMORELAND

And, good my lord, so please you let our trains

March by us, that we may peruse the men

We should have cop'd withal.

ARCHBISHOP. Go, good Lord Hastings,

And, ere they be dismiss'd, let them march by.

Exit HASTINGS

PRINCE JOHN. I trust, lords, we shall lie to-night together.



Re-enter WESTMORELAND

Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?

WESTMORELAND. The leaders, having charge from you to stand,

Will not go off until they hear you speak.

PRINCE JOHN. They know their duties.



Re-enter HASTINGS

HASTINGS. My lord, our army is dispers'd already.

Like youthful steers unyok'd, they take their courses

East, west, north, south; or like a school broke up,

Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.

WESTMORELAND. Good tidings, my Lord Hastings; for the which

I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason;

And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,

Of capital treason I attach you both.

MOWBRAY. Is this proceeding just and honourable?

WESTMORELAND. Is your assembly so?

ARCHBISHOP. Will you thus break your faith?

PRINCE JOHN. I pawn'd thee none:

I promis'd you redress of these same grievances

Whereof you did complain; which, by mine honour,

I will perform with a most Christian care.

But for you, rebels- look to taste the due

Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours.

Most shallowly did you these arms commence,

Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence.

Strike up our drums, pursue the scatt'red stray.

God, and not we, hath safely fought to-day.

Some guard these traitors to the block of death,

Treason's true bed and yielder-up of breath. Exeunt





SCENE III. Another part of the forest


Alarum; excursions. Enter FALSTAFF and COLVILLE, meeting

FALSTAFF. What's your name, sir? Of what condition are you, and of

what place, I pray?

COLVILLE. I am a knight sir; and my name is Colville of the Dale.

FALSTAFF. Well then, Colville is your name, a knight is your

degree, and your place the Dale. Colville shall still be your

name, a traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place- a place

deep enough; so shall you be still Colville of the Dale.

COLVILLE. Are not you Sir John Falstaff?

FALSTAFF. As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am. Do you yield,

sir, or shall I sweat for you? If I do sweat, they are the drops

of thy lovers, and they weep for thy death; therefore rouse up

fear and trembling, and do observance to my mercy.

COLVILLE. I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that thought

yield me.

FALSTAFF. I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine;

and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name.

An I had but a belly of any indifferency, I were simply the most

active fellow in Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes me.

Here comes our general.



Enter PRINCE JOHN OF LANCASTER, WESTMORELAND,

BLUNT, and others



PRINCE JOHN. The heat is past; follow no further now.

Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.

Exit WESTMORELAND

Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?

When everything is ended, then you come.

These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,

One time or other break some gallows' back.

FALSTAFF. I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus: I never

knew yet but rebuke and check was the reward of valour. Do you

think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet? Have I, in my poor and

old motion, the expedition of thought? I have speeded hither with

the very extremest inch of possibility; I have found'red nine

score and odd posts; and here, travel tainted as I am, have, in

my pure and immaculate valour, taken Sir John Colville of the

Dale,a most furious knight and valorous enemy. But what of that?

He saw me, and yielded; that I may justly say with the hook-nos'd

fellow of Rome-I came, saw, and overcame.

PRINCE JOHN. It was more of his courtesy than your deserving.

FALSTAFF. I know not. Here he is, and here I yield him; and I

beseech your Grace, let it be book'd with the rest of this day's

deeds; or, by the Lord, I will have it in a particular ballad

else, with mine own picture on the top on't, Colville kissing my

foot; to the which course if I be enforc'd, if you do not all

show like gilt twopences to me, and I, in the clear sky of fame,

o'ershine you as much as the full moon doth the cinders of the

element, which show like pins' heads to her, believe not the word

of the noble. Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.

PRINCE JOHN. Thine's too heavy to mount.

FALSTAFF. Let it shine, then.

PRINCE JOHN. Thine's too thick to shine.

FALSTAFF. Let it do something, my good lord, that may do me good,

and call it what you will.

PRINCE JOHN. Is thy name Colville?

COLVILLE. It is, my lord.

PRINCE JOHN. A famous rebel art thou, Colville.

FALSTAFF. And a famous true subject took him.

COLVILLE. I am, my lord, but as my betters are

That led me hither. Had they been rul'd by me,

You should have won them dearer than you have.

FALSTAFF. I know not how they sold themselves; but thou, like a

kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis; and I thank thee for

thee.





Re-enter WESTMORELAND

PRINCE JOHN. Now, have you left pursuit?

WESTMORELAND. Retreat is made, and execution stay'd.

PRINCE JOHN. Send Colville, with his confederates,

To York, to present execution.

Blunt, lead him hence; and see you guard him sure.

Exeunt BLUNT and others

And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords.

I hear the King my father is sore sick.

Our news shall go before us to his Majesty,

Which, cousin, you shall bear to comfort him

And we with sober speed will follow you.

FALSTAFF. My lord, I beseech you, give me leave to go through

Gloucestershire; and, when you come to court, stand my good lord,

pray, in your good report.

PRINCE JOHN. Fare you well, Falstaff. I, in my condition,

Shall better speak of you than you deserve.

Exeunt all but FALSTAFF

FALSTAFF. I would you had but the wit; 'twere better than your

dukedom. Good faith, this same young sober-blooded boy doth not

love me; nor a man cannot make him laugh- but that's no marvel;

he drinks no wine. There's never none of these demure boys come

to any proof; for thin drink doth so over-cool their blood, and

making many fish-meals, that they fall into a kind of male

green-sickness; and then, when they marry, they get wenches. They

are generally fools and cowards-which some of us should be too,

but for inflammation. A good sherris-sack hath a two-fold

operation in it. It ascends me into the brain; dries me there all

the foolish and dull and crudy vapours which environ it; makes it

apprehensive, quick, forgetive, full of nimble, fiery, and

delectable shapes; which delivered o'er to the voice, the tongue,

which is the birth, becomes excellent wit. The second property of

your excellent sherris is the warming of the blood; which before,

cold and settled, left the liver white and pale, which is the

badge of pusillanimity and cowardice; but the sherris warms it,

and makes it course from the inwards to the parts extremes. It

illumineth the face, which, as a beacon, gives warning to all the

rest of this little kingdom, man, to arm; and then the vital

commoners and inland petty spirits muster me all to their

captain, the heart, who, great and puff'd up with this retinue,

doth any deed of courage- and this valour comes of sherris. So

that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets

it a-work; and learning, a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil

till sack commences it and sets it in act and use. Hereof comes

it that Prince Harry is valiant; for the cold blood he did

naturally inherit of his father, he hath, like lean, sterile, and

bare land, manured, husbanded, and till'd, with excellent

endeavour of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris,

that he is become very hot and valiant. If I had a thousand sons,

the first humane principle I would teach them should be to

forswear thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.



Enter BARDOLPH

How now, Bardolph!

BARDOLPH. The army is discharged all and gone.

FALSTAFF. Let them go. I'll through Gloucestershire, and there will

I visit Master Robert Shallow, Esquire. I have him already

temp'ring between my finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal

with him. Come away. Exeunt





SCENE IV. Westminster. The Jerusalem Chamber


Enter the KING, PRINCE THOMAS OF CLARENCE, PRINCE HUMPHREY OF GLOUCESTER,

WARWICK, and others



KING. Now, lords, if God doth give successful end

To this debate that bleedeth at our doors,

We will our youth lead on to higher fields,

And draw no swords but what are sanctified.

Our navy is address'd, our power connected,

Our substitutes in absence well invested,

And everything lies level to our wish.

Only we want a little personal strength;

And pause us till these rebels, now afoot,

Come underneath the yoke of government.

WARWICK. Both which we doubt not but your Majesty

Shall soon enjoy.

KING. Humphrey, my son of Gloucester,

Where is the Prince your brother?

PRINCE HUMPHREY. I think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.

KING. And how accompanied?

PRINCE HUMPHREY. I do not know, my lord.

KING. Is not his brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?

PRINCE HUMPHREY. No, my good lord, he is in presence here.

CLARENCE. What would my lord and father?

KING. Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence.

How chance thou art not with the Prince thy brother?

He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas.

Thou hast a better place in his affection

Than all thy brothers; cherish it, my boy,

And noble offices thou mayst effect

Of mediation, after I am dead,

Between his greatness and thy other brethren.

Therefore omit him not; blunt not his love,

Nor lose the good advantage of his grace

By seeming cold or careless of his will;

For he is gracious if he be observ'd.

He hath a tear for pity and a hand

Open as day for melting charity;

Yet notwithstanding, being incens'd, he is flint;

As humorous as winter, and as sudden

As flaws congealed in the spring of day.

His temper, therefore, must be well observ'd.

Chide him for faults, and do it reverently,

When you perceive his blood inclin'd to mirth;

But, being moody, give him line and scope

Till that his passions, like a whale on ground,

Confound themselves with working. Learn this, Thomas,

And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends,

A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in,

That the united vessel of their blood,

Mingled with venom of suggestion-

As, force perforce, the age will pour it in-

Shall never leak, though it do work as strong

As aconitum or rash gunpowder.

CLARENCE. I shall observe him with all care and love.

KING. Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?

CLARENCE. He is not there to-day; he dines in London.

KING. And how accompanied? Canst thou tell that?

CLARENCE. With Poins, and other his continual followers.

KING. Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds;

And he, the noble image of my youth,

Is overspread with them; therefore my grief

Stretches itself beyond the hour of death.

The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape,

In forms imaginary, th'unguided days

And rotten times that you shall look upon

When I am sleeping with my ancestors.

For when his headstrong riot hath no curb,

When rage and hot blood are his counsellors

When means and lavish manners meet together,

O, with what wings shall his affections fly

Towards fronting peril and oppos'd decay!

WARWICK. My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite.

The Prince but studies his companions

Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language,

'Tis needful that the most immodest word

Be look'd upon and learnt; which once attain'd,

Your Highness knows, comes to no further use

But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms,

The Prince will, in the perfectness of time,

Cast off his followers; and their memory

Shall as a pattern or a measure live

By which his Grace must mete the lives of other,

Turning past evils to advantages.

KING. 'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb

In the dead carrion.



Enter WESTMORELAND

Who's here? Westmoreland?

WESTMORELAND. Health to my sovereign, and new happiness

Added to that that am to deliver!

Prince John, your son, doth kiss your Grace's hand.

Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all,

Are brought to the correction of your law.

There is not now a rebel's sword unsheath'd,

But Peace puts forth her olive everywhere.

The manner how this action hath been borne

Here at more leisure may your Highness read,

With every course in his particular.

KING. O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird,

Which ever in the haunch of winter sings

The lifting up of day.



Enter HARCOURT

Look here's more news.

HARCOURT. From enemies heaven keep your Majesty;

And, when they stand against you, may they fall

As those that I am come to tell you of!

The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph,

With a great power of English and of Scots,

Are by the shrieve of Yorkshire overthrown.

The manner and true order of the fight

This packet, please it you, contains at large.

KING. And wherefore should these good news make me sick?

Will Fortune never come with both hands full,

But write her fair words still in foulest letters?

She either gives a stomach and no food-

Such are the poor, in health- or else a feast,

And takes away the stomach- such are the rich

That have abundance and enjoy it not.

I should rejoice now at this happy news;

And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy.

O me! come near me now I am much ill.

PRINCE HUMPHREY. Comfort, your Majesty!

CLARENCE. O my royal father!

WESTMORELAND. My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.

WARWICK. Be patient, Princes; you do know these fits

Are with his Highness very ordinary.

Stand from him, give him air; he'll straight be well.

CLARENCE. No, no; he cannot long hold out these pangs.

Th' incessant care and labour of his mind

Hath wrought the mure that should confine it in

So thin that life looks through, and will break out.

PRINCE HUMPHREY. The people fear me; for they do observe

Unfather'd heirs and loathly births of nature.

The seasons change their manners, as the year

Had found some months asleep, and leapt them over.

CLARENCE. The river hath thrice flow'd, no ebb between;

And the old folk, Time's doting chronicles,

Say it did so a little time before

That our great grandsire, Edward, sick'd and died.

WARWICK. Speak lower, Princes, for the King recovers.

PRINCE HUMPHREY. This apoplexy will certain be his end.

KING. I pray you take me up, and bear me hence

Into some other chamber. Softly, pray. Exeunt





SCENE V. Westminster. Another chamber


The KING lying on a bed; CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER, WARWICK, and others in attendance

KING. Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends;

Unless some dull and favourable hand

Will whisper music to my weary spirit.

WARWICK. Call for the music in the other room.

KING. Set me the crown upon my pillow here.

CLARENCE. His eye is hollow, and he changes much.

WARWICK. Less noise! less noise!



Enter PRINCE HENRY

PRINCE. Who saw the Duke of Clarence?

CLARENCE. I am here, brother, full of heaviness.

PRINCE. How now! Rain within doors, and none abroad!

How doth the King?

PRINCE HUMPHREY. Exceeding ill.

PRINCE. Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.

PRINCE HUMPHREY. He alt'red much upon the hearing it.

PRINCE. If he be sick with joy, he'll recover without physic.

WARWICK. Not so much noise, my lords. Sweet Prince, speak low;

The King your father is dispos'd to sleep.

CLARENCE. Let us withdraw into the other room.

WARWICK. Will't please your Grace to go along with us?

PRINCE. No; I will sit and watch here by the King.

Exeunt all but the PRINCE

Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,

Being so troublesome a bedfellow?

O polish'd perturbation! golden care!

That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide

To many a watchful night! Sleep with it now!

Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet

As he whose brow with homely biggen bound

Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!

When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit

Like a rich armour worn in heat of day

That scald'st with safety. By his gates of breath

There lies a downy feather which stirs not.

Did he suspire, that light and weightless down

Perforce must move. My gracious lord! my father!

This sleep is sound indeed; this is a sleep

That from this golden rigol hath divorc'd

So many English kings. Thy due from me

Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood

Which nature, love, and filial tenderness,

Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.

My due from thee is this imperial crown,

Which, as immediate from thy place and blood,

Derives itself to me. [Putting on the crown] Lo where it sits-

Which God shall guard; and put the world's whole strength

Into one giant arm, it shall not force

This lineal honour from me. This from thee

Will I to mine leave as 'tis left to me. Exit

KING. Warwick! Gloucester! Clarence!



Re-enter WARWICK, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE

CLARENCE. Doth the King call?

WARWICK. What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?

KING. Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?

CLARENCE. We left the Prince my brother here, my liege,

Who undertook to sit and watch by you.

KING. The Prince of Wales! Where is he? Let me see him.

He is not here.

WARWICK. This door is open; he is gone this way.

PRINCE HUMPHREY. He came not through the chamber where we stay'd.

KING. Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?

WARWICK. When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.

KING. The Prince hath ta'en it hence. Go, seek him out.

Is he so hasty that he doth suppose

My sleep my death?

Find him, my lord of Warwick; chide him hither.

Exit WARWICK

This part of his conjoins with my disease

And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you are!

How quickly nature falls into revolt

When gold becomes her object!

For this the foolish over-careful fathers

Have broke their sleep with thoughts,

Their brains with care, their bones with industry;

For this they have engrossed and pil'd up

The cank'red heaps of strange-achieved gold;

For this they have been thoughtful to invest

Their sons with arts and martial exercises;

When, like the bee, tolling from every flower

The virtuous sweets,

Our thighs with wax, our mouths with honey pack'd,

We bring it to the hive, and, like the bees,

Are murd'red for our pains. This bitter taste

Yields his engrossments to the ending father.



Re-enter WARWICK

Now where is he that will not stay so long

Till his friend sickness hath determin'd me?

WARWICK. My lord, I found the Prince in the next room,

Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks,

With such a deep demeanour in great sorrow,

That tyranny, which never quaff'd but blood,

Would, by beholding him, have wash'd his knife

With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither.

KING. But wherefore did he take away the crown?



Re-enter PRINCE HENRY

Lo where he comes. Come hither to me, Harry.

Depart the chamber, leave us here alone.

Exeunt all but the KING and the PRINCE

PRINCE. I never thought to hear you speak again.

KING. Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.

I stay too long by thee, I weary thee.

Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair

That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours

Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth!

Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee.

Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity

Is held from falling with so weak a wind

That it will quickly drop; my day is dim.

Thou hast stol'n that which, after some few hours,

Were thine without offense; and at my death

Thou hast seal'd up my expectation.

Thy life did manifest thou lov'dst me not,

And thou wilt have me die assur'd of it.

Thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts,

Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart,

To stab at half an hour of my life.

What, canst thou not forbear me half an hour?

Then get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself;

And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear

That thou art crowned, not that I am dead.

Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse

Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head;

Only compound me with forgotten dust;

Give that which gave thee life unto the worms.

Pluck down my officers, break my decrees;

For now a time is come to mock at form-

Harry the Fifth is crown'd. Up, vanity:

Down, royal state. All you sage counsellors, hence.

And to the English court assemble now,

From every region, apes of idleness.

Now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum.

Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance,

Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit

The oldest sins the newest kind of ways?

Be happy, he will trouble you no more.

England shall double gild his treble guilt;

England shall give him office, honour, might;

For the fifth Harry from curb'd license plucks

The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog

Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent.

O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows!

When that my care could not withhold thy riots,

What wilt thou do when riot is thy care?

O, thou wilt be a wilderness again.

Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants!

PRINCE. O, pardon me, my liege! But for my tears,

The moist impediments unto my speech,

I had forestall'd this dear and deep rebuke

Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard

The course of it so far. There is your crown,

And he that wears the crown immortally

Long guard it yours! [Kneeling] If I affect it more

Than as your honour and as your renown,

Let me no more from this obedience rise,

Which my most inward true and duteous spirit

Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending!

God witness with me, when I here came in

And found no course of breath within your Majesty,

How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign,

O, let me in my present wildness die,

And never live to show th' incredulous world

The noble change that I have purposed!

Coming to look on you, thinking you dead-

And dead almost, my liege, to think you were-

I spake unto this crown as having sense,

And thus upbraided it: 'The care on thee depending

Hath fed upon the body of my father;

Therefore thou best of gold art worst of gold.

Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,

Preserving life in med'cine potable;

But thou, most fine, most honour'd, most renown'd,

Hast eat thy bearer up.' Thus, my most royal liege,

Accusing it, I put it on my head,

To try with it- as with an enemy

That had before my face murd'red my father-

The quarrel of a true inheritor.

But if it did infect my blood with joy,

Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride;

If any rebel or vain spirit of mine

Did with the least affection of a welcome

Give entertainment to the might of it,

Let God for ever keep it from my head,

And make me as the poorest vassal is,

That doth with awe and terror kneel to it!

KING. O my son,

God put it in thy mind to take it hence,

That thou mightst win the more thy father's love,

Pleading so wisely in excuse of it!

Come hither, Harry; sit thou by my bed,

And hear, I think, the very latest counsel

That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son,

By what by-paths and indirect crook'd ways

I met this crown; and I myself know well

How troublesome it sat upon my head:

To thee it shall descend with better quiet,

Better opinion, better confirmation;

For all the soil of the achievement goes

With me into the earth. It seem'd in me

But as an honour snatch'd with boist'rous hand;

And I had many living to upbraid

My gain of it by their assistances;

Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed,

Wounding supposed peace. All these bold fears

Thou seest with peril I have answered;

For all my reign hath been but as a scene

Acting that argument. And now my death

Changes the mood; for what in me was purchas'd

Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort;

So thou the garland wear'st successively.

Yet, though thou stand'st more sure than I could do,

Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green;

And all my friends, which thou must make thy friends,

Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out;

By whose fell working I was first advanc'd,

And by whose power I well might lodge a fear

To be again displac'd; which to avoid,

I cut them off; and had a purpose now

To lead out many to the Holy Land,

Lest rest and lying still might make them look

Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry,

Be it thy course to busy giddy minds

With foreign quarrels, that action, hence borne out,

May waste the memory of the former days.

More would I, but my lungs are wasted so

That strength of speech is utterly denied me.

How I came by the crown, O God, forgive;

And grant it may with thee in true peace live!

PRINCE. My gracious liege,

You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me;

Then plain and right must my possession be;

Which I with more than with a common pain

'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.



Enter PRINCE JOHN OF LANCASTER, WARWICK, LORDS, and others

KING. Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.

PRINCE JOHN. Health, peace, and happiness, to my royal father!

KING. Thou bring'st me happiness and peace, son John;

But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown

From this bare wither'd trunk. Upon thy sight

My worldly business makes a period.

Where is my Lord of Warwick?

PRINCE. My Lord of Warwick!

KING. Doth any name particular belong

Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?

WARWICK. 'Tis call'd Jerusalem, my noble lord.

KING. Laud be to God! Even there my life must end.

It hath been prophesied to me many years,

I should not die but in Jerusalem;

Which vainly I suppos'd the Holy Land.

But bear me to that chamber; there I'll lie;

In that Jerusalem shall Harry die. Exeunt





ACT V. SCENE I. Gloucestershire. SHALLOW'S house


Enter SHALLOW, FALSTAFF, BARDOLPH, and PAGE

SHALLOW. By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away to-night.

What, Davy, I say!

FALSTAFF. You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.

SHALLOW. I will not excuse you; you shall not be excus'd; excuses

shall not be admitted; there is no excuse shall serve; you shall

not be excus'd. Why, Davy!



Enter DAVY

DAVY. Here, sir.

SHALLOW. Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy; let me see, Davy; let me see,

Davy; let me see- yea, marry, William cook, bid him come hither.

Sir John, you shall not be excus'd.

DAVY. Marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served; and,

again, sir- shall we sow the headland with wheat?

SHALLOW. With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook- are there no

young pigeons?

DAVY. Yes, sir. Here is now the smith's note for shoeing and

plough-irons.

SHALLOW. Let it be cast, and paid. Sir John, you shall not be

excused.

DAVY. Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had; and,

sir, do you mean to stop any of William's wages about the sack he

lost the other day at Hinckley fair?

SHALLOW. 'A shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a couple of

short-legg'd hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little tiny

kickshaws, tell William cook.

DAVY. Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?

SHALLOW. Yea, Davy; I will use him well. A friend i' th' court is

better than a penny in purse. Use his men well, Davy; for they

are arrant knaves and will backbite.

DAVY. No worse than they are backbitten, sir; for they have

marvellous foul linen.

SHALLOW. Well conceited, Davy- about thy business, Davy.

DAVY. I beseech you, sir, to countenance William Visor of Woncot

against Clement Perkes o' th' hill.

SHALLOW. There, is many complaints, Davy, against that Visor. That

Visor is an arrant knave, on my knowledge.

DAVY. I grant your worship that he is a knave, sir; but yet God

forbid, sir, but a knave should have some countenance at his

friend's request. An honest man, sir, is able to speak for

himself, when a knave is not. I have serv'd your worship truly,

sir, this eight years; an I cannot once or twice in a quarter

bear out a knave against an honest man, I have but a very little

credit with your worship. The knave is mine honest friend, sir;

therefore, I beseech you, let him be countenanc'd.

SHALLOW. Go to; I say he shall have no wrong. Look about,

DAVY. [Exit DAVY] Where are you, Sir John? Come, come, come, off

with your boots. Give me your hand, Master Bardolph.

BARDOLPH. I am glad to see your worship.

SHALLOW. I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master Bardolph.

[To the PAGE] And welcome, my tall fellow. Come, Sir John.

FALSTAFF. I'll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.

[Exit SHALLOW] Bardolph, look to our horses. [Exeunt BARDOLPH

and PAGE] If I were sawed into quantities, I should make four

dozen of such bearded hermits' staves as Master Shallow. It is a

wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men's

spirits and his. They, by observing of him, do bear themselves

like foolish justices: he, by conversing with them, is turned

into a justice-like serving-man. Their spirits are so married in

conjunction with the participation of society that they flock

together in consent, like so many wild geese. If I had a suit to

Master Shallow, I would humour his men with the imputation of

being near their master; if to his men, I would curry with Master

Shallow that no man could better command his servants. It is

certain that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught,

as men take diseases, one of another; therefore let men take heed

of their company. I will devise matter enough out of this Shallow

to keep Prince Harry in continual laughter the wearing out of six

fashions, which is four terms, or two actions; and 'a shall laugh

without intervallums. O, it is much that a lie with a slight

oath, and a jest with a sad brow will do with a fellow that never

had the ache in his shoulders! O, you shall see him laugh till

his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up!

SHALLOW. [Within] Sir John!

FALSTAFF. I come, Master Shallow; I come, Master Shallow.

Exit





SCENE II. Westminster. The palace


Enter, severally, WARWICK, and the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE

WARWICK. How now, my Lord Chief Justice; whither away?

CHIEF JUSTICE. How doth the King?

WARWICK. Exceeding well; his cares are now all ended.

CHIEF JUSTICE. I hope, not dead.

WARWICK. He's walk'd the way of nature;

And to our purposes he lives no more.

CHIEF JUSTICE. I would his Majesty had call'd me with him.

The service that I truly did his life

Hath left me open to all injuries.

WARWICK. Indeed, I think the young king loves you not.

CHIEF JUSTICE. I know he doth not, and do arm myself

To welcome the condition of the time,

Which cannot look more hideously upon me

Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.



Enter LANCASTER, CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER,

WESTMORELAND, and others



WARWICK. Here comes the heavy issue of dead Harry.

O that the living Harry had the temper

Of he, the worst of these three gentlemen!

How many nobles then should hold their places

That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!

CHIEF JUSTICE. O God, I fear all will be overturn'd.

PRINCE JOHN. Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.

GLOUCESTER & CLARENCE. Good morrow, cousin.

PRINCE JOHN. We meet like men that had forgot to speak.

WARWICK. We do remember; but our argument

Is all too heavy to admit much talk.

PRINCE JOHN. Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy!

CHIEF JUSTICE. Peace be with us, lest we be heavier!

PRINCE HUMPHREY. O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed;

And I dare swear you borrow not that face

Of seeming sorrow- it is sure your own.

PRINCE JOHN. Though no man be assur'd what grace to find,

You stand in coldest expectation.

I am the sorrier; would 'twere otherwise.

CLARENCE. Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair;

Which swims against your stream of quality.

CHIEF JUSTICE. Sweet Princes, what I did, I did in honour,

Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul;

And never shall you see that I will beg

A ragged and forestall'd remission.

If truth and upright innocency fail me,

I'll to the King my master that is dead,

And tell him who hath sent me after him.

WARWICK. Here comes the Prince.



Enter KING HENRY THE FIFTH, attended

CHIEF JUSTICE. Good morrow, and God save your Majesty!

KING. This new and gorgeous garment, majesty,

Sits not so easy on me as you think.

Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear.

This is the English, not the Turkish court;

Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,

But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers,

For, by my faith, it very well becomes you.

Sorrow so royally in you appears

That I will deeply put the fashion on,

And wear it in my heart. Why, then, be sad;

But entertain no more of it, good brothers,

Than a joint burden laid upon us all.

For me, by heaven, I bid you be assur'd,

I'll be your father and your brother too;

Let me but bear your love, I'll bear your cares.

Yet weep that Harry's dead, and so will I;

But Harry lives that shall convert those tears

By number into hours of happiness.

BROTHERS. We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.

KING. You all look strangely on me; and you most.

You are, I think, assur'd I love you not.

CHIEF JUSTICE. I am assur'd, if I be measur'd rightly,

Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.

KING. No?

How might a prince of my great hopes forget

So great indignities you laid upon me?

What, rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison,

Th' immediate heir of England! Was this easy?

May this be wash'd in Lethe and forgotten?

CHIEF JUSTICE. I then did use the person of your father;

The image of his power lay then in me;

And in th' administration of his law,

Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth,

Your Highness pleased to forget my place,

The majesty and power of law and justice,

The image of the King whom I presented,

And struck me in my very seat of judgment;

Whereon, as an offender to your father,

I gave bold way to my authority

And did commit you. If the deed were ill,

Be you contented, wearing now the garland,

To have a son set your decrees at nought,

To pluck down justice from your awful bench,

To trip the course of law, and blunt the sword

That guards the peace and safety of your person;

Nay, more, to spurn at your most royal image,

And mock your workings in a second body.

Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours;

Be now the father, and propose a son;

Hear your own dignity so much profan'd,

See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted,

Behold yourself so by a son disdain'd;

And then imagine me taking your part

And, in your power, soft silencing your son.

After this cold considerance, sentence me;

And, as you are a king, speak in your state

What I have done that misbecame my place,

My person, or my liege's sovereignty.

KING. You are right, Justice, and you weigh this well;

Therefore still bear the balance and the sword;

And I do wish your honours may increase

Till you do live to see a son of mine

Offend you, and obey you, as I did.

So shall I live to speak my father's words:

'Happy am I that have a man so bold

That dares do justice on my proper son;

And not less happy, having such a son

That would deliver up his greatness so

Into the hands of justice.' You did commit me;

For which I do commit into your hand

Th' unstained sword that you have us'd to bear;

With this remembrance- that you use the same

With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit

As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand.

You shall be as a father to my youth;

My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear;

And I will stoop and humble my intents

To your well-practis'd wise directions.

And, Princes all, believe me, I beseech you,

My father is gone wild into his grave,

For in his tomb lie my affections;

And with his spirits sadly I survive,

To mock the expectation of the world,

To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out

Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down

After my seeming. The tide of blood in me

Hath proudly flow'd in vanity till now.

Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea,

Where it shall mingle with the state of floods,

And flow henceforth in formal majesty.

Now call we our high court of parliament;

And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel,

That the great body of our state may go

In equal rank with the best govern'd nation;

That war, or peace, or both at once, may be

As things acquainted and familiar to us;

In which you, father, shall have foremost hand.

Our coronation done, we will accite,

As I before rememb'red, all our state;

And- God consigning to my good intents-

No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say,

God shorten Harry's happy life one day. Exeunt





SCENE III. Gloucestershire. SHALLOW'S orchard


Enter FALSTAFF, SHALLOW, SILENCE, BARDOLPH, the PAGE, and DAVY

SHALLOW. Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour, we

will eat a last year's pippin of mine own graffing, with a dish

of caraways, and so forth. Come, cousin Silence. And then to bed.

FALSTAFF. Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling and rich.

SHALLOW. Barren, barren, barren; beggars all, beggars all, Sir John

-marry, good air. Spread, Davy, spread, Davy; well said, Davy.

FALSTAFF. This Davy serves you for good uses; he is your

serving-man and your husband.

SHALLOW. A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, Sir

John. By the mass, I have drunk too much sack at supper. A good

varlet. Now sit down, now sit down; come, cousin.

SILENCE. Ah, sirrah! quoth-a- we shall [Singing]



Do nothing but eat and make good cheer,

And praise God for the merry year;

When flesh is cheap and females dear,

And lusty lads roam here and there,

So merrily,

And ever among so merrily.



FALSTAFF. There's a merry heart! Good Master Silence, I'll give you

a health for that anon.

SHALLOW. Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.

DAVY. Sweet sir, sit; I'll be with you anon; most sweet sir, sit.

Master Page, good Master Page, sit. Proface! What you want in

meat, we'll have in drink. But you must bear; the heart's all.

Exit

SHALLOW. Be merry, Master Bardolph; and, my little soldier there,

be merry.

SILENCE. [Singing]



Be merry, be merry, my wife has all;

For women are shrews, both short and tall;

'Tis merry in hall when beards wag an;

And welcome merry Shrove-tide.

Be merry, be merry.



FALSTAFF. I did not think Master Silence had been a man of this

mettle.

SILENCE. Who, I? I have been merry twice and once ere now.



Re-enter DAVY

DAVY. [To BARDOLPH] There's a dish of leather-coats for you.

SHALLOW. Davy!

DAVY. Your worship! I'll be with you straight. [To BARDOLPH]

A cup of wine, sir?

SILENCE. [Singing]



A cup of wine that's brisk and fine,

And drink unto the leman mine;

And a merry heart lives long-a.



FALSTAFF. Well said, Master Silence.

SILENCE. An we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet o' th' night.

FALSTAFF. Health and long life to you, Master Silence!

SILENCE. [Singing]



Fill the cup, and let it come,

I'll pledge you a mile to th' bottom.



SHALLOW. Honest Bardolph, welcome; if thou want'st anything and

wilt not call, beshrew thy heart. Welcome, my little tiny thief

and welcome indeed too. I'll drink to Master Bardolph, and to all

the cabileros about London.

DAVY. I hope to see London once ere I die.

BARDOLPH. An I might see you there, Davy!

SHALLOW. By the mass, you'R crack a quart together- ha! will you

not, Master Bardolph?

BARDOLPH. Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.

SHALLOW. By God's liggens, I thank thee. The knave will stick by

thee, I can assure thee that. 'A will not out, 'a; 'tis true

bred.

BARDOLPH. And I'll stick by him, sir.

SHALLOW. Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing; be merry.

[One knocks at door] Look who's at door there, ho! Who knocks?

Exit DAVY

FALSTAFF. [To SILENCE, who has drunk a bumper] Why, now you have

done me right.

SILENCE. [Singing]



Do me right,

And dub me knight.

Samingo.



Is't not so?

FALSTAFF. 'Tis so.

SILENCE. Is't so? Why then, say an old man can do somewhat.



Re-enter DAVY

DAVY. An't please your worship, there's one Pistol come from the

court with news.

FALSTAFF. From the court? Let him come in.



Enter PISTOL

How now, Pistol?

PISTOL. Sir John, God save you!

FALSTAFF. What wind blew you hither, Pistol?

PISTOL. Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. Sweet knight,

thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.

SILENCE. By'r lady, I think 'a be, but goodman Puff of Barson.

PISTOL. Puff!

Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!

Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,

And helter-skelter have I rode to thee;

And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys,

And golden times, and happy news of price.

FALSTAFF. I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.

PISTOL. A foutra for the world and worldlings base!

I speak of Africa and golden joys.

FALSTAFF. O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news?

Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.

SILENCE. [Singing] And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John.

PISTOL. Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons?

And shall good news be baffled?

Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.

SHALLOW. Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.

PISTOL. Why, then, lament therefore.

SHALLOW. Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with news from the

court, I take it there's but two ways- either to utter them or

conceal them. I am, sir, under the King, in some authority.

PISTOL. Under which king, Bezonian? Speak, or die.

SHALLOW. Under King Harry.

PISTOL. Harry the Fourth- or Fifth?

SHALLOW. Harry the Fourth.

PISTOL. A foutra for thine office!

Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is King;

Harry the Fifth's the man. I speak the truth.

When Pistol lies, do this; and fig me, like

The bragging Spaniard.

FALSTAFF. What, is the old king dead?

PISTOL. As nail in door. The things I speak are just.

FALSTAFF. Away, Bardolph! saddle my horse. Master Robert Shallow,

choose what office thou wilt in the land, 'tis thine. Pistol, I

will double-charge thee with dignities.

BARDOLPH. O joyful day!

I would not take a knighthood for my fortune.

PISTOL. What, I do bring good news?

FALSTAFF. Carry Master Silence to bed. Master Shallow, my Lord

Shallow, be what thou wilt- I am Fortune's steward. Get on thy

boots; we'll ride all night. O sweet Pistol! Away, Bardolph!

[Exit BARDOLPH] Come, Pistol, utter more to me; and withal

devise something to do thyself good. Boot, boot, Master Shallow!

I know the young King is sick for me. Let us take any man's

horses: the laws of England are at my commandment. Blessed are

they that have been my friends; and woe to my Lord Chief Justice!

PISTOL. Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!

'Where is the life that late I led?' say they.

Why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days! Exeunt





SCENE IV. London. A street


Enter BEADLES, dragging in HOSTESS QUICKLY and DOLL TEARSHEET

HOSTESS. No, thou arrant knave; I would to God that I might die,

that I might have thee hang'd. Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of

joint.

FIRST BEADLE. The constables have delivered her over to me; and she

shall have whipping-cheer enough, I warrant her. There hath been

a man or two lately kill'd about her.

DOLL. Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. Come on; I'll tell thee what,

thou damn'd tripe-visag'd rascal, an the child I now go with do

miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou

paper-fac'd villain.

HOSTESS. O the Lord, that Sir John were come! He would make this a

bloody day to somebody. But I pray God the fruit of her womb

miscarry!

FIRST BEADLE. If it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again;

you have but eleven now. Come, I charge you both go with me; for

the man is dead that you and Pistol beat amongst you.

DOLL. I'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will have you

as soundly swing'd for this- you blue-bottle rogue, you filthy

famish'd correctioner, if you be not swing'd, I'll forswear

half-kirtles.

FIRST BEADLE. Come, come, you she knight-errant, come.

HOSTESS. O God, that right should thus overcome might!

Well, of sufferance comes ease.

DOLL. Come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice.

HOSTESS. Ay, come, you starv'd bloodhound.

DOLL. Goodman death, goodman bones!

HOSTESS. Thou atomy, thou!

DOLL. Come, you thin thing! come, you rascal!

FIRST BEADLE. Very well. Exeunt





SCENE V. Westminster. Near the Abbey


Enter GROOMS, strewing rushes

FIRST GROOM. More rushes, more rushes!

SECOND GROOM. The trumpets have sounded twice.

THIRD GROOM. 'Twill be two o'clock ere they come from the

coronation. Dispatch, dispatch. Exeunt



Trumpets sound, and the KING and his train pass

over the stage. After them enter FALSTAFF, SHALLOW,

PISTOL, BARDOLPH, and page



FALSTAFF. Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow; I will make the

King do you grace. I will leer upon him, as 'a comes by; and do

but mark the countenance that he will give me.

PISTOL. God bless thy lungs, good knight!

FALSTAFF. Come here, Pistol; stand behind me. [To SHALLOW] O, if

I had had to have made new liveries, I would have bestowed the

thousand pound I borrowed of you. But 'tis no matter; this poor

show doth better; this doth infer the zeal I had to see him.

SHALLOW. It doth so.

FALSTAFF. It shows my earnestness of affection-

SHALLOW. It doth so.

FALSTAFF. My devotion-

SHALLOW. It doth, it doth, it doth.

FALSTAFF. As it were, to ride day and night; and not to deliberate,

not to remember, not to have patience to shift me-

SHALLOW. It is best, certain.

FALSTAFF. But to stand stained with travel, and sweating with

desire to see him; thinking of nothing else, putting all affairs

else in oblivion, as if there were nothing else to be done but to

see him.

PISTOL. 'Tis 'semper idem' for 'obsque hoc nihil est.' 'Tis all in

every part.

SHALLOW. 'Tis so, indeed.

PISTOL. My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver

And make thee rage.

Thy Doll, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,

Is in base durance and contagious prison;

Hal'd thither

By most mechanical and dirty hand.

Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto's snake,

For Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.

FALSTAFF. I will deliver her.

[Shouts,within, and the trumpets sound]

PISTOL. There roar'd the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.



Enter the KING and his train, the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE

among them



FALSTAFF. God save thy Grace, King Hal; my royal Hal!

PISTOL. The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!

FALSTAFF. God save thee, my sweet boy!

KING. My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.

CHIEF JUSTICE. Have you your wits? Know you what 'tis you speak?

FALSTAFF. My king! my Jove! I speak to thee, my heart!

KING. I know thee not, old man. Fall to thy prayers.

How ill white hairs become a fool and jester!

I have long dreamt of such a kind of man,

So surfeit-swell'd, so old, and so profane;

But being awak'd, I do despise my dream.

Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace;

Leave gormandizing; know the grave doth gape

For thee thrice wider than for other men-

Reply not to me with a fool-born jest;

Presume not that I am the thing I was,

For God doth know, so shall the world perceive,

That I have turn'd away my former self;

So will I those that kept me company.

When thou dost hear I am as I have been,

Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast,

The tutor and the feeder of my riots.

Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,

As I have done the rest of my misleaders,

Not to come near our person by ten mile.

For competence of life I will allow you,

That lack of means enforce you not to evils;

And, as we hear you do reform yourselves,

We will, according to your strengths and qualities,

Give you advancement. Be it your charge, my lord,

To see perform'd the tenour of our word.

Set on. Exeunt the KING and his train

FALSTAFF. Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pounds.

SHALLOW. Yea, marry, Sir John; which I beseech you to let me have

home with me.

FALSTAFF. That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not you grieve at

this; I shall be sent for in private to him. Look you, he must

seem thus to the world. Fear not your advancements; I will be the

man yet that shall make you great.

SHALLOW. I cannot perceive how, unless you give me your doublet,

and stuff me out with straw. I beseech you, good Sir John, let me

have five hundred of my thousand.

FALSTAFF. Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that you heard

was but a colour.

SHALLOW. A colour that I fear you will die in, Sir John.

FALSTAFF. Fear no colours; go with me to dinner. Come, Lieutenant

Pistol; come, Bardolph. I shall be sent for soon at night.



Re-enter PRINCE JOHN, the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE,

with officers



CHIEF JUSTICE. Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet;

Take all his company along with him.

FALSTAFF. My lord, my lord-

CHIEF JUSTICE. I cannot now speak. I will hear you soon.

Take them away.

PISTOL. Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta.

Exeunt all but PRINCE JOHN and the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE

PRINCE JOHN. I like this fair proceeding of the King's.

He hath intent his wonted followers

Shall all be very well provided for;

But all are banish'd till their conversations

Appear more wise and modest to the world.

CHIEF JUSTICE. And so they are.

PRINCE JOHN. The King hath call'd his parliament, my lord.

CHIEF JUSTICE. He hath.

PRINCE JOHN. I will lay odds that, ere this year expire,

We bear our civil swords and native fire

As far as France. I heard a bird so sing,

Whose music, to my thinking, pleas'd the King.

Come, will you hence? Exeunt





EPILOGUE EPILOGUE.


First my fear, then my curtsy, last my speech. My fear, is your displeasure; my curtsy, my duty; and my speech, to beg your pardons. If you look for a good speech now, you undo me; for what I have to say is of mine own making; and what, indeed, I should say will, I doubt, prove mine own marring. But to the purpose, and so to the venture. Be it known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the end of a displeasing play, to pray your patience for it and to promise you a better. I meant, indeed, to pay you with this; which if like an ill venture it come unluckily home, I break, and you, my gentle creditors, lose. Here I promis'd you I would be, and here I commit my body to your mercies. Bate me some, and I will pay you some, and, as most debtors do, promise you infinitely; and so I kneel down before you- but, indeed, to pray for the Queen. If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will you command me to use my legs? And yet that were but light payment-to dance out of your debt. But a good conscience will make any possible satisfaction, and so would I. All the gentlewomen here have forgiven me. If the gentlemen will not, then the gentlemen do not agree with the gentlewomen, which was never seen before in such an assembly. One word more, I beseech you. If you be not too much cloy'd with fat meat, our humble author will continue the story, with Sir John in it, and make you merry with fair Katherine of France; where, for anything I know, Falstaff shall die of a sweat, unless already 'a be killed with your hard opinions; for Oldcastle died a martyr and this is not the man. My tongue is weary; when my legs are too, I will bid you good night.





THE LIFE OF KING HENRY V




* * *





Contents


ACT I

Prologue.

Scene I. London. An ante-chamber in the King’s palace.

Scene II. The same. The presence chamber.



ACT II

Chorus.

Scene I. London. A street.

Scene II. Southampton. A council-chamber.

Scene III. London. Before a tavern.

Scene IV. France. The King’s palace.



ACT III

Chorus.

Scene I. France. Before Harfleur.

Scene II. The same.

Scene III. Before the gates.

Scene IV. The French King’s palace.

Scene V. The same.

Scene VI. The English camp in Picardy.

Scene VII. The French camp, near Agincourt.



ACT IV

Chorus.

Scene I. The English camp at Agincourt.

Scene II. The French camp.

Scene III. The English camp.

Scene IV. The field of battle.

Scene V. Another part of the field.

Scene VI. Another part of the field.

Scene VII. Another part of the field.

Scene VIII. Before King Henry’s pavilion.



ACT V

Chorus.

Scene I. France. The English camp.

Scene II. France. A royal palace.

Epilogue.





Dramatis Personæ


KING HENRY V.

DUKE OF CLARENCE, brother to the King.

DUKE OF BEDFORD, brother to the King.

DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, brother to the King.

DUKE OF EXETER, uncle to the King.

DUKE OF YORK, cousin to the King.

EARL OF SALISBURY.

EARL OF HUNTINGDON.

EARL OF WESTMORLAND.

EARL OF WARWICK.

ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.

BISHOP OF ELY.

EARL OF CAMBRIDGE.

LORD SCROOP.

SIR THOMAS GREY.

SIR THOMAS ERPINGHAM, officer in King Henry’s army.

GOWER, officer in King Henry’s army.

FLUELLEN, officer in King Henry’s army.

MACMORRIS, officer in King Henry’s army.

JAMY, officer in King Henry’s army.

BATES, soldier in the same.

COURT, soldier in the same.

WILLIAMS, soldier in the same.

PISTOL.

NYM.

BARDOLPH.

BOY.

A Herald.

CHARLES VI, king of France.

LEWIS, the Dauphin.

DUKE OF BERRY.

DUKE OF BRITTANY.

DUKE OF BURGUNDY.

DUKE OF ORLEANS.

DUKE OF BOURBON.

The Constable of France.

RAMBURES, French Lord.

GRANDPRÉ, French Lord.

Governor of Harfleur

MONTJOY, a French herald.

Ambassadors to the King of England.

ISABEL, queen of France.

KATHARINE, daughter to Charles and Isabel.

ALICE, a lady attending on her.

HOSTESS of a tavern in Eastcheap, formerly Mistress Nell Quickly, and now married to Pistol.

CHORUS.

Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Citizens, Messengers, and Attendants.





SCENE: England; afterwards France.





PROLOGUE.


Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.

O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend

The brightest heaven of invention,

A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,

And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!

Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,

Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,

Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire

Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,

The flat unraised spirits that hath dar’d

On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth

So great an object. Can this cockpit hold

The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram

Within this wooden O the very casques

That did affright the air at Agincourt?

O pardon! since a crooked figure may

Attest in little place a million,

And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,

On your imaginary forces work.

Suppose within the girdle of these walls

Are now confin’d two mighty monarchies,

Whose high upreared and abutting fronts

The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder;

Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.

Into a thousand parts divide one man,

And make imaginary puissance.

Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them

Printing their proud hoofs i’ th’ receiving earth.

For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,

Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times,

Turning the accomplishment of many years

Into an hour-glass: for the which supply,

Admit me Chorus to this history;

Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,

Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.

[Exit.]





ACT I


SCENE I. London. An ante-chamber in the King’s palace.


Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely.

CANTERBURY.

My lord, I’ll tell you, that self bill is urg’d

Which in the eleventh year of the last king’s reign

Was like, and had indeed against us passed

But that the scambling and unquiet time

Did push it out of farther question.

ELY.

But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?

CANTERBURY.

It must be thought on. If it pass against us,

We lose the better half of our possession:

For all the temporal lands, which men devout

By testament have given to the Church,

Would they strip from us; being valu’d thus:

As much as would maintain, to the King’s honour,

Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,

Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;

And, to relief of lazars and weak age,

Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,

A hundred almshouses right well supplied;

And to the coffers of the King beside,

A thousand pounds by th’ year. Thus runs the bill.

ELY.

This would drink deep.

CANTERBURY.

’Twould drink the cup and all.

ELY.

But what prevention?

CANTERBURY.

The King is full of grace and fair regard.

ELY.

And a true lover of the holy Church.

CANTERBURY.

The courses of his youth promis’d it not.

The breath no sooner left his father’s body

But that his wildness, mortified in him,

Seemed to die too; yea, at that very moment

Consideration like an angel came

And whipped th’ offending Adam out of him,

Leaving his body as a paradise

T’ envelope and contain celestial spirits.

Never was such a sudden scholar made,

Never came reformation in a flood

With such a heady currance scouring faults,

Nor never Hydra-headed wilfulness

So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,

As in this king.

ELY.

We are blessed in the change.

CANTERBURY.

Hear him but reason in divinity

And, all-admiring, with an inward wish

You would desire the King were made a prelate;

Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,

You would say it hath been all in all his study;

List his discourse of war, and you shall hear

A fearful battle rendered you in music;

Turn him to any cause of policy,

The Gordian knot of it he will unloose,

Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,

The air, a chartered libertine, is still,

And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears

To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;

So that the art and practic part of life

Must be the mistress to this theoric:

Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,

Since his addiction was to courses vain,

His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,

His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,

And never noted in him any study,

Any retirement, any sequestration

From open haunts and popularity.

ELY.

The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,

And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best

Neighboured by fruit of baser quality;

And so the Prince obscured his contemplation

Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,

Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,

Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty.

CANTERBURY.

It must be so, for miracles are ceased,

And therefore we must needs admit the means

How things are perfected.

ELY.

But, my good lord,

How now for mitigation of this bill

Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty

Incline to it, or no?

CANTERBURY.

He seems indifferent,

Or rather swaying more upon our part

Than cherishing th’ exhibitors against us;

For I have made an offer to his Majesty,

Upon our spiritual convocation

And in regard of causes now in hand,

Which I have opened to his Grace at large,

As touching France, to give a greater sum

Than ever at one time the clergy yet

Did to his predecessors part withal.

ELY.

How did this offer seem received, my lord?

CANTERBURY.

With good acceptance of his Majesty;

Save that there was not time enough to hear,

As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,

The severals and unhidden passages

Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,

And generally to the crown and seat of France,

Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.

ELY.

What was th’ impediment that broke this off?

CANTERBURY.

The French ambassador upon that instant

Craved audience; and the hour, I think, is come

To give him hearing. Is it four o’clock?

ELY.

It is.

CANTERBURY.

Then go we in, to know his embassy,

Which I could with a ready guess declare

Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

ELY.

I’ll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.

[Exeunt.]





SCENE II. The same. The presence chamber.


Enter King Henry, Gloucester, Bedford, Clarence, Warwick, Westmorland, Exeter and Attendants.

KING HENRY.

Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?

EXETER.

Not here in presence.

KING HENRY.

Send for him, good uncle.

WESTMORLAND.

Shall we call in th’ ambassador, my liege?

KING HENRY.

Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,

Before we hear him, of some things of weight

That task our thoughts concerning us and France.

Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely.

CANTERBURY.

God and his angels guard your sacred throne

And make you long become it!

KING HENRY.

Sure, we thank you.

My learned lord, we pray you to proceed

And justly and religiously unfold

Why the law Salic that they have in France

Or should or should not bar us in our claim.

And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,

That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,

Or nicely charge your understanding soul

With opening titles miscreate, whose right

Suits not in native colours with the truth;

For God doth know how many now in health

Shall drop their blood in approbation

Of what your reverence shall incite us to.

Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,

How you awake our sleeping sword of war.

We charge you in the name of God, take heed;

For never two such kingdoms did contend

Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops

Are every one a woe, a sore complaint

’Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords

That makes such waste in brief mortality.

Under this conjuration speak, my lord,

For we will hear, note, and believe in heart

That what you speak is in your conscience washed

As pure as sin with baptism.

CANTERBURY.

Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers,

That owe yourselves, your lives, and services

To this imperial throne. There is no bar

To make against your Highness’ claim to France

But this, which they produce from Pharamond:

In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant,

“No woman shall succeed in Salic land;”

Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze

To be the realm of France, and Pharamond

The founder of this law and female bar.

Yet their own authors faithfully affirm

That the land Salic is in Germany,

Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe;

Where Charles the Great, having subdu’d the Saxons,

There left behind and settled certain French;

Who, holding in disdain the German women

For some dishonest manners of their life,

Establish’d then this law, to wit, no female

Should be inheritrix in Salic land;

Which Salic, as I said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala,

Is at this day in Germany call’d Meissen.

Then doth it well appear the Salic law

Was not devised for the realm of France;

Nor did the French possess the Salic land

Until four hundred one and twenty years

After defunction of King Pharamond,

Idly suppos’d the founder of this law,

Who died within the year of our redemption

Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great

Subdu’d the Saxons, and did seat the French

Beyond the river Sala, in the year

Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,

King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,

Did, as heir general, being descended

Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,

Make claim and title to the crown of France.

Hugh Capet also, who usurp’d the crown
